Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

Available online 23 May 2021 0261-3794/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Creating critical citizens? Anti-austerity protests and public opinion

Vicente Valentim

European University Institute, Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords: Public opinion Protests Anti-austerity Portugal Unconventional political participation

A B S T R A C T

Following the Great Recession, many countries witnessed large protests against the austerity policies their governments implemented. What was their effect on public opinion? I argue that these protests can make citizens more critical of elite performance, but not more disaffected or undemocratic. Anti-austerity protests voice civil society actors instead of elites in the public debate, making that debate more relatable. Such increased relat­ ability can make individuals more comfortable expressing their own dissatisfaction, and it can make them perceive that their voice is more valued. Taking advantage of a demonstration happening during the fieldwork of the fifth wave of the European Social Survey in Portugal, I find exposure to the protest decreased satisfaction and trust in elites. I find no evidence that the protest made individuals more disaffected from politics or more un­ democratic. Supporting the argument regarding the mechanism, the protest increased the number of claims by civil society actors reported in the press and its effect was stronger for individuals worse represented by insti­ tutionalized elites. These findings highlight the democratic importance of unconventional forms of participation, and deepen our understanding of their interplay with conventional politics.

1. Introduction

In 2007–2008, a crisis in the US real estate market soon developed into one of the worst global financial crises on record. In an effort to cope with it, the governments of many countries implemented austerity measures. These measures were often met with popular demonstrations. Anti-austerity protests happened in regions as diverse as Southern Europe, Ireland, or the United States, forming part of what is often considered to be a worldwide wave of contention (Baumgarten 2013; Della Porta and Mattoni 2014; Tarrow 2011). I argue that such anti-austerity protests can make citizens of their countries more critical of the performance of their elites, but not more disaffected or undemocratic. Given their high visibility, a large portion of the population was made aware of their existence. Such awareness directed their attention to the claims being made amidst the protest, as well as the actors putting forward those claims. Given their non- institutionalized nature, these protests thus voiced civil society actors, instead of elites, in the political debate. In so doing, they changed the pattern of the public debate by giving voice to civil society actors who are likely to be perceived as more relatable than the institutionalized elites that tend to dominate such debate. In being exposed to relatable actors voicing discontentment with elite performance, citizens become themselves more critical of such performance. This can happen in two ways. In the first place, the protest

can signal to individuals that it is more acceptable to voice their discontent. In the second place, the protest can make individuals feel that their own voice matters more than they previously thought. Both pathways increase the likelihood that citizens will voice discontent with elite performance. To test this argument empirically, I look at the case of a large, yet isolated protest that happened Portugal on March 12th, 2011: the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca demonstration. Unlike what happened in other coun­ tries, this demonstration took place amidst a period of no popular mobilization, providing for a rather clean treatment. Taking advantage of the fact that the demonstration happened dur­ ing the fieldwork of the Wave 5 of the European Social Survey (ESS5) in the country, I show that exposure to the protest decreased respondents’ specific political support. They became less satisfied with the Portuguese government, economy, and democracy; and more distrusting of politi­ cians, the parliament, and political parties. To be sure, a decrease in specific political support is compatible not just with respondents becoming more critical, but also with them becoming more disaffected or undemocratic—which would have very different normative implications. For this reason, the second step in the empirical analyses is to show that increased dissatisfaction does not come hand-in-hand with citizens becoming more disengaged from pol­ itics. Indeed these analyses show that, if anything, the protests increased efforts in seeking for information about politics. In a third step, I also

E-mail address: vicente.valentim@eui.eu.

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Electoral Studies

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/electstud

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2021.102339 Received 28 July 2020; Received in revised form 21 April 2021; Accepted 22 April 2021

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

2

show that respondents are not becoming more authoritarian, as proxied by their support for law and order. This means that the protest made individuals more critical of the performance of political elites, but that did not come hand-in-hand with an increase in apathy towards politics or more authoritarian views. Thus, the evidence suggests that exposure to the protest made individuals closer to the idea of critical citizens. I then move on to investigating the mechanism. Through analyses of news stories in the press, I show that the protest increased the number of claims on by civil society actors that are reported in the press. Looking at who is more affected by the protest, I find some evidence that the effect is stronger for individuals who were worse represented, in descriptive terms, by institutionalized elites. These two sets of results are in line with the argument put forward in the paper, suggesting that exposure to the protest made individuals more critical of elite performance by voicing civil society actors that are more relatable than elites. These findings make three main contributions to existing literature. In the first place, they highlight how protests can have a crucial role in making citizens relate to the political debate in their countries. The paper also contributes to the literature on participatory democracy, which has stressed the importance of participation in non-governmental spheres as a ways of acquiring democratic tools. As the findings of the paper suggest, the participation of other citizens in one’s country can have a similar effect. Finally, the paper adds to the literature on descriptive representation by showing the extent to which citizens resemble not only MPs, but also other participants in the public debate, can also have an important effect on political attitudes.

2. Previous work and theoretical argument

Unconventional forms of political participation such as protests are often regarded as a by-product of dissatisfaction with political elites. Following concerns about a generalized decline in conventional partic­ ipation in Western democracies (Blais 2007; Franklin 2004), some au­ thors have argued that citizens are not necessarily becoming more disengaged from politics. Rather, they have come to prefer different forms of participation, which tend to be elite-challenging instead of elite-directed. This increasing preference for different forms of engaging with politics has been regarded as a consequence of a growing body of critical citizens. Critical citizens are individuals who are critical of the performance of the elites, but whose views concerning the legitimacy of democracy as a form of government and engagement in politics have not been affected (Dalton and van Sickle., 2005; Inglehart and Catterberg 2002; Inglehart and Welzel 2005; Kriesi 2018; Norris 1999, 2011). Empirically, previous literature has shown that critical citizens exhibit low levels of specific political support (both satisfaction and trust) combined with high feel­ ings of empowerment (efficacy and interest) (Christensen 2016). It is important to differentiate critical citizens from disaffected and undemocratic citizens. Disaffection refers to a “subjective feeling of powerlessness, cynicism and lack of confidence in the political process, politicians and democratic institutions, but with no questioning of the political regime” (Torcal 2001, pp. 1–2). Undemocratic citizens, in turn, do question the political regime, and do not believe democracy to be a better form of government than alternative ones (Hofferbert and Klin­ gemann 2001). Whether the mass public is critical, disaffected, or undemocratic carries very different implications for democracy. A large number of disaffected or undemocratic citizens can have negative effects for de­ mocracy. Disaffected citizens are likely to have an apathic attitude to­ ward the political process. In turn, undemocratic citizens are likely to try

and overturn the very democratic regime—for example, by voting for anti-systemic parties (Magalh˜aes 2005). By comparison, critical citizens have been regarded as beneficial for democracy, since they push for a constant re-evaluation of the working of democratic process, thus forc­ ing its renewal (Klingemann 1998; Dalton 2013). I contend that exposure to anti-austerity protests can make in­ dividuals become more critical, but not more disaffected or undemo­ cratic. In other words, I expect exposure to anti-austerity protests to reduce citizens’ specific political support, but I expect this reduction not to be accompanied of a decrease in political interest and efficacy. I also do not expect this decrease to be accompanied of an increase in the level of authoritarianism of citizens. The idea that anti-austerity protests can affect the attitudes of citi­ zenry is in line with a body of previous literature showing that protests can bring about large-scale changes at the societal level. In the American Politics literature, they have been shown to influence the behavior of representatives, making them more likely to vote according to the pro­ testers’ claims. This seems to be the case both for liberal (Gillion 2012) and conservative protests (Madestam et al., 2013). Protests also seem to be able to significantly alter the attitudes of the public at large, be it when it comes to women’s rights (Banaszak and Ondercin 2016), immigration policy (Branton et al., 2015), or even conservative causes (Madestam et al., 2013). In a study of the effect of the Civil Rights movement, Mazumder (2018) shows that the effect of protests on public opinion can be quite long-lasting. While more limited, the Comparative Politics literature on the topic has come to similar conclusions. Drawing upon the case of Russia, Frye and Borisova (2019) show that post-electoral protests significantly reduced trust in the country’s government. When it comes to the effect of anti-austerity protests on attitudes, concretely, I conceive of it as a three-step process. In the first step, in­ dividuals are made aware of the protest. The specific way in which they learn about it can take several forms, such as media outlets, direct contact with others who have heard of it, or internet searches. For initial this step to take place, the assumption is that the protest needs to be large enough to be heard of by many citizens. Fig. 2 below suggests that this is the case when it comes to the specific protest that the paper draws upon. In a second step, upon learning about the protest, individuals are made aware of the specific claims made in it, as well as to the actors making those claims. These claims were mostly of two sorts. In the first place, opposition to the austerity measures that governments imple­ mented as a reaction to the global financial crisis. In the second place, calls for an increased proximity between citizens and policy makers—for example, through processes of direct democracy (Fominaya 2017). In putting forward these claims, large anti-austerity protests can thus in­ crease the salience of anti-elite rhetoric and expose citizens to criticism of governments and political institutions. Such claims, however, are not necessarily new. Anti-establishment parties, for example, are likely to voice such claims frequently. Why, then, should anti-austerity protests have an independent effect on the attitudes of citizens? The answer, I argue, lies on the specific actors putting forward these claims. These actors are crucial to the hypothe­ sized effect of the protest because they differ significantly from the modal political actors who take part in the political debate. The public debate tends to revolve almost exclusively around institutionalized elites, with non-institutionalized actors such as civil society ones prac­ tically absent from it (Trenz 2004; Koopmans 2010)—a tendency that the rise of new media has not changed (Gerhards and Sch¨afer 2010). The centrality of institutionalized, elite actors in the political debate

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

3

is key to the argument put forward here because the majority of citizens are likely to perceive elites as distant from them. As a consequence, they are likely to be disengaged from a debate that is dominated by actors that have stark differences from them. Anti-austerity protests change this situation by altering the pattern of the political debate in their country. Protests are non-institutionalized forms of claims-making that voice civil society actors, instead of elites (Johnson 2011). The main actors in anti-austerity protests, concretely, resembled regular citizens to a larger extent than professional, institutionalized politicians and frequently refused to align with existing parties. That was also the case with the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest specifically, on which the empirical section of this paper relies (Accornero and Pinto 2015). In a third step, exposure the claims of these relatable actors changes the attitudes of the general public, making citizens more critical of elite performance. This last step can operate through two paths. On the one hand, increased relatability can make individuals feel like it is more acceptable for them to express their dissatisfaction with the government. Previous research has shown that the extent to which individuals express their preferences is a function of the cues they take regarding the pref­ erences of others in their society. Whenever they perceive that their own views have become more acceptable, they are more likely to express them. Such perception usually comes from information about the pref­ erences of others in one’s society that may not have been displayed in public (Valentim 2021; Dinas et al. 2020; Bursztyn et al. 2017; Bursztyn et al. 2018). For example, Bursztyn et al. (2018) show that, once men in Saudi Arabia are shown evidence that many others in their community are in favor of women’s labor, they become more likely to support their wives joining the workforce. Exposure to large anti-austerity protests like the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest can operate in an analogous way. To the extent that the main actors voiced by the protest are highly relatable, they can signal that many others in one’s society are dissatisfied with the government. This, in turn, is likely to make individuals more comfortable in expressing their own dissatisfaction. On the other hand, the relatability of actors voiced by the protest can make citizens feel that their views are valued to a higher extent. This argument is analogous to arguments about how the descriptive repre­ sentation of underprivileged groups can increase their political repre­ sentation. Following the classic work of Pitkin (1967), a body of literature has argued that the extent to which representative bodies resemble the citizenry they are supposed to represent affects perceptions of legitimacy, political involvement, political efficacy, and media use (Mansbridge 1999; Atkeson and Carrillo 2007; Burns et al. 2001; Hansen 1997). The resemblance between individuals in the political arena and the citizenry can lead to the perception that the political system is more open to input by its citizens (Atkeson and Carrillo 2007, p. 81). As a consequence, when members of groups that are not usually present in the public political debate enter it, members of those groups are likely to feel that their opinions have more value, which makes them more likely to engage in political discussions (Wolbrecht and Campbell 2007). Moreover, the presence of relatable individuals in the political debate is likely to make citizens feel that they “could be rulers and not just ruled, and that they could lead and not just be led” (Zetterberg 2009, p. 717). One such mechanism has been shown when it comes to the attitudes of female citizens. Because the political space is occupied mostly by men, women have low visibility in it. When this pattern changes and visible women appear in the political landscape, they make the political debate more relatable to female voters, who thus become more likely to discuss politics (e.g., Atkeson 2003). Anti-austerity protests can have an analogous effect. To be sure,

protest organizers are not formal representatives like MPs, and anti- austerity protests do not appeal to specific, traditionally under- represented constituencies. This being said, these protests took place against a background of a perceived legitimacy crisis, against which protest organizers explicitly mobilized (Gerbaudo 2017). This crisis was consubstantiated in a gap between the attitudes of political elites and those of ordinary voters (Teperoglou et al., 2014). As such, one might expect that the presence of non-institutionalized actors putting forward claims in the political debate would make regular citizens feel that their views are more valuable, through a similar mechanism to the one pre­ viously shown by the descriptive representation literature. To test this argument, I look at a large protest in the Portuguese wave of anti-austerity contention—the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest on March 12th, 2011. Using this protest as a treatment presents the advantage that it happened before and after periods of low popular mobilization, providing for a rather clean treatment with which to assess the effect of a single protest on public opinion. To estimate this effect, I take advantage of the fact that the protest happened during the fieldwork of the ESS5 in the country. Following the argument laid out in this section, the analyses will follow in three steps. In the first place, I test whether the protest reduced specific support. Following Christensen (2016), I operationalize specific support as satisfaction with, and trust in, the country’s elites. I expect exposure to the protest to have depressed both sets of indicators. How­ ever, as discussed above, a decrease in specific support is also compat­ ible with individuals becoming more disaffected or more undemocratic. For this reason, the two following steps test (a) whether individuals are also becoming more disaffected; and (b) whether they are becoming more undemocratic. I then move on to investigate the mechanism driving the results. If this effect is indeed brought about by a change in the relatability of the political debate as a consequence of the protest, I should find the protest to have increased the number of claims by civil society actors reported in the press. The effect of the protest should also be stronger for individuals worse represented, in descriptive terms, by institutionalized elites.

3. Research design

The bulk of the analyses in the paper rely on comparisons of in­ dividuals who were interviewed before and after March 12th, 2011, when the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca took place. The control group (n = 2; 026) consists of ESS5 respondents interviewed before that date. The treat­ ment group (n = 117) consists of ESS5 respondents on March 12th, 2011 and the following days.1 While this represents a significant imbalance between the size of the two groups, a number of robustness checks find no evidence of threats to the assumptions of the design. Moreover, Fig. 1 below shows no evidence of individuals interviewed toward the end of the fieldwork having significantly different attitudes from the remaining ones. I use the whole sample in the main analyses because that repre­ sents a more agnostic first step to estimating the effect of the protest. Fig. A.4 in the Online Appendix shows that the results remain identical if one uses the smallest bandwidth around the protest that still yields a statistical power above 0.8. The Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest was the first in the Portuguese wave of anti-austerity contention. This protest was prior to the birth of the Spanish Indignados movement, in May 2011. The demonstration was called for online, on Facebook, with political parties and trade unions absent from its organization. Indeed, the organizers were identified as three individual people. They signed the manifesto with their personal names, with no specific civil society group being responsible for the

1 I include individuals interviewed on March 12th in the control group since the protest lasted for most of that day (starting around lunch time). Fig. A.10 in the Online Appendix shows that the main results remain identical if one removes individuals interviewed in the day of the protest.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

4

organization. The organizers defined the demonstration as a ‘non- partisan, secular, and peaceful protest’ against the precarity of the ‘Desperate Generation’ (Geraç˜ao `a Rasca) of young people in Portugal. The protest also had little international connection to other social movement organizations abroad (Valentim 2019). Despite the lack of support from institutionalized actors and the highly inorganic nature of its organization, the protest ended up mobi­ lizing a surprisingly large number of citizens. Depending on the source, a total of 200,000 to 500,000 people are estimated to have marched in a number of cities all over the country. This made it the largest protest action in the country since the transition to democracy that followed the Revolution of the Carnations in 1974 (Baumgarten 2013). The protest was peaceful and gathered individuals from all across the ideological spectrum. It was also visible in Portuguese media and widely com­ mented by opinion makers in the country (Valentim 2019). The orga­ nizers themselves confessed their surprise at the success of the demonstration, the number of people attending, and the high level of media visibility it was granted (Expresso 2011). The Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest makes for a good test of the argument laid out in the previous section because it happened amidst a period of relatively low mobilization (Accornero and Pinto 2015), with no other major protests taking place right before or after it. This allows one to assess the short-term effect of a single protest on public opinion. By contrast, anti-austerity protests in other countries often happened amidst a plethora of events. In Spain, for example, the first Indignados protest in May 2011 was followed by subsequent daily protests, amidst the campaign for a municipal—and, in some regions, regional—election. Such context does not allow one to test for the short-term effect of a

protest action on public opinion due to fears of compound treatment effect. No such concurrent events happened around the date of the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca demonstration. Table 1 summarizes the timeline of events during the fieldwork of ESS5. To be sure, other events apart from concurrent protests might also present a threat to the exclusion restriction. One might be particularly worried that the protest happened before the fall of the minority gov­ ernment of the Socialist Party (PS, center left) on March 23rd. To make sure that the results are not being driven by the fall of the government itself, the analyses include only respondents interviewed until March 22nd—the day before the parliamentary rejection that led to the resig­ nation of the Prime Minister. However, should this fall be the result of growing satisfaction with elite performance during the pre-treatment period, it might present a threat to the exclusion restriction. The fall of the government was triggered by the failure of the Parliament to adopt a new pack of austerity measures (Quarto Pacto de Estabilidade e Crescimento—PEC IV). The country had struggled to meet the reference values in the Maastricht treatment ever since the begin­ ning of the Eurozone, with three excessive debt procedures being opened by the European Commission. As a consequence, austerity measures were frequent in the country since 1999 (De Sousa, Magalh˜aes, and Amaral 2014, pp. 1520–1521). The 2009 election brought to power a minority center-left government led by the Socialist Party (PS). Following the large deficit of that year, from March 2010 this govern­ ment implemented a set of packs of austerity measures—the so-called PECs. The three first packs had been passed thanks to the abstention of the main opposition party—PSD, center right, who abstained. However, this party decided to switch gears and vote against the fourth pack (Mag­ alh˜aes 2012, p. 313). This led to the resignation of the Prime Minister Jos´e S´ocrates and the calling of a snap election for June that year—even if the general view of the Portuguese population was that new elections were not desirable (Freire and Santana-Pereira 2012, p. 181). While the fall of the government was triggered by a process of elite negotiation, a possible growth of dissatisfaction with elite performance in the final days of the government could represent a threat to the exclusion restriction. I empirically assess whether such growth in dissatisfaction was taking place in three ways. In the first place, Fig. 1 plots the evolution in the outcome variables in the control group. It shows no clear evidence of pre-trends in the outcome variables before March 12th, 2011—the date of the protest.

Table 1 Important dates during the fieldwork of ESS5.

November 6th, 2010 Beginning of the ESS5 fieldwork

March 12th, 2011 Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest takes place.

March 22nd, 2011 End of the period included in the analyses.

March 23rd, 2011 Parliament rejects a new pack of austerity measures (PEC IV); Prime Minister Jos´e S´ocrates (Socialist Party, center left) resigns. March 25th, 2011 End of ESS5 fieldwork.

Fig. 1. Trends in the outcome variables during the months prior to the protest.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

5

In the second place, Fig. A.1 in the Online Appendix tests this hy­ pothesis more explicitly. It takes individuals included in the control group and regresses the dependent variables on the date in which they were interviewed. It shows no evidence of a trend. All coefficients are small, far from statistical significance, and the direction of the effects is contradictory. Finally, in Fig. 3, which represents the main analyses of the paper, I include a placebo test that uses the median date in the control group as the date of the adminis-tration of the treatment. To do so, I remove re­ spondents who are part of the treatment group and then compare the dependent variables before and after the median date in the control group. These analyses test whether there was a longitudinal trend in the dependent variables previous to the protest. Comparing individuals interviewed before and after the median maximizes statistical power,

making it more likely to find an effect (Imbens and Lemieux 2008). As discussed below, this set of analyses also shows no evidence of a pre-treatment trend in the evolution of the outcome variables. For the research design to be valid, it is also necessary for the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest to have been highly salient. I provide a number of different sources to show its salience. In the first place, Fig. 2 shows the share of Google searches for Geraç˜ao `a Rasca between the beginning of the fieldwork of ESS5 and March 22nd, 2011—the end of the period included in the analyses. To put these values in context, I compare them to searches for ‘IMF’ (‘FMI’ in the Portuguese acronym) and ‘crisis’ (‘crise’ in the Portuguese word). There is no increase in either of the other two keywords.2 In turn, there is a large peak in searches for Geraç˜ao `a Rasca centered around March 12th, 2011—the day of the demonstration. On that day, these keywords were searched for 33.3

Fig. 2. How Salient was the Protest? Relative Google Searches for ‘Geraç˜ao `a Rasca’, ‘Crise’, and ‘FMI’ during the Period Analyzed, and Newspaper Covers the Day After the Protest.

2 The large peak in searches for the protest around its date might hide some smaller trends in searches for the remaining keywords. To make sure that is not the case, Fig. A.2 in Online Appendix replicates the same graph without including the searches for Geraç˜ao `a Rasca. It shows that, even when focusing only on the two remaining keywords, there is no discernible trend in searches for any of them.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

6

times more often than the remaining two. The remarkable salience of the protest suggests that one should expect a high degree of compliance. In other words, most ESS5 respondents interviewed after the date of the protest were likely to have been, indeed, exposed to it. Following Balcells and Torrats-Espinosa (2018), the figure also provides newspapers frontpage of the day following the protest (March 13th, 2011). Unfortunately, not all Portuguese newspapers have an easily accessible online archive. For this reason, Fig. 2 shows the frontpage of three of the main newspapers that can be accessed online: Público and Di´ario de Notícias—two of the main quality newspapers in the country—and Correio da Manh˜a—a tabloid and the newspaper with the highest daily circulation numbers. As the Figure shows, all three newspapers featured the protest in their frontpage. Each of them included a picture of the protest, highlighting it as one of the main pieces of news that day. No other piece of news is highlighted simultaneously in the frontpage of the three newspapers.

Table A.1 in the Online Appendix, provides the number of pages that newspapers O Público and Di´ario de Notícias devoted to the protest—a set of analyses that also follows Balcells and Torrats-Espinosa (2018). As a baseline, the mean number of pages devoted to the terrorist attacks analyzed by Balcells and Torrats-Espinosa (2018) is 4.15 pages per newspaper per attack (as shown in Table S10 of their paper). The mean number of pages devoted to the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest in Portugal, 11 pages, was 2.44 times higher. This suggests that the protest was highly visible in Portuguese media.3

Unexpected events during survey designs (UESD) like the one employed in this paper should make use of covariate adjustments to reduce dangers of violation of the Conditional Ignorability Assump­ tion—the assumption that, after conditioning on a set of covariates, assignment to treatment or control is independent of an individual’s potential outcomes (Mu˜noz et al. 2020, p. 16). For this reason, I report models that make use of Entropy Balance (Hainmueller 2012; Hain­ mueller and Xu 2013)—as suggested by Mu˜noz et al. (2020). Table A.2 in the Online Appendix shows the differences in means in the raw data and after entropy balancing. While there seem to be some differences in the raw data, these differences disappear or are drastically reduced after balancing.4

The covariates used for Entropy Balance follow the recommenda­ tions made by Mu˜noz et al. (2020). In the first place, I include variables that alleviate concerns regarding the potential differential reachability of respondents and the procedure by which the survey was carried out. These are a variable indicating how many times the interviewer had unsuccessfully tried to contact the respondent prior to the moment of the interview and dummies for each region of residence. I also include a set of variables that may be expected to predict why respondents were interviewed at later stages of the fieldwork, but which are unlikely to have been affected by the treatment. These are age, gender, and a dummy for whether respondents completed more than primary educa­ tion. Finally, there may also be a correlation between reachability and ideology. Because the respondent’s left-right ideology is itself likely to have been affected by the treatment and hence does not represent a good control, I include instead dummies for party voted for in the previous election. Unlike self-reported ideology, vote choice is less likely to be affected by the treatment, thus raising less concerns of post-treatment bias (Montgomery et al. 2018; King and Zeng 2006). The dependent variables in the main analyses are satisfaction with the present state of economy, satisfaction with the government,

satisfaction with the present state of democracy in the country; and trust in the parliament, political parties, and politicians. These variables were chosen in an effort to include all measures included in the ESS that capture satisfaction with elite performance. Table A.3 in Online Ap­ pendix shows the descriptive statistics of these variables. It shows that the overall level of satisfaction with elites in ESS5 in Portugal is low. These outcomes form two clusters (satisfaction with elite perfor-mance and trust in institutions) that, according to Christensen (2016), are crucial to the definition of critical citizenry. For this reason, I include a summary measure of each as a ways of avoiding multiple hypotheses testing and reducing noise. These two summary measures were obtained by extracting the first factor of a principal component analysis. I also include a placebo outcome in the analyses: how much each respondent reports to trust the United Nations (UN). Ideally, a placebo outcome should be close to the outcome of interest, but be expected not to have been affected by the treatment. Trust in UN fulfils these criteria: while it also taps trust in an institution, trust in this specific institution should not have been affected by the treatment. Despite the fact that anti-austerity protests contested political institutions and their lack of representativeness, their main targets were still at the national level (Fominaya 2017). That was the case with the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest concretely (Baumgarten 2013). Given that the UN is a supra-national institution that had little or no influence in the political situation of Portugal at the time, including this placebo outcome taps into a potential concern: that individuals interviewed towards the end of the fieldwork are simply more distrusting of institutions generally. Should that be the case, one should find an effect when drawing upon trust in UN.

4. Findings: exposure to the protest and public opinion

Fig. 3 shows the Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effect of exposure to the protest on the set of outcome variables.5 All dependent variables are stan­ dardized to make them more comparable with other variables that are used in subsequent analyses and which are measured in different scales. As discussed in the previous section, I compare the effect of the protest to the effect of a placebo treatment that uses the median of the control group as the date of administration of the treatment. Supporting the argument of the paper, the Figure shows that the protest significantly decreased satisfaction with, and trust in, the country’s political elites. This suggests that exposure to the protest reduced specific political support among Portuguese citizens. In turn, I find no effect when drawing upon the placebo outcome, or in the ana­ lyses that use the median date of the control group as the treatment date. In other words, I find no evidence of a longitudinal trend in the dependent variables before the protest took place. When compared to other studies, the magnitude of the results is remarkable. Table A.4 in Online Appendix shows these analyses using unstandardized coefficients. The absolute effect on satisfaction with government is larger than that of trust in institutions found by Kriesi (2018)’s analyses of South European countries. The absolute effect on satisfaction with democracy in both models is more than twice as large as the effect of sociotropic evaluations of economic performance found by Anderson and Guillory (1997)’s analysis of Portugal. In these analyses, the treatment group is as large as possible. It comprises all individuals interviewed between the protest and March

3 While analyses of the TV coverage of the protests would provide further evidence of this point, unfortunately archives of Portuguese TV are not acces­ sible online. For this reason, I report analyses of newspaper coverage alone.

4 Fig. A.3 in the Online Appendix shows that the main analyses remain un­ changed if one uses parametric controls instead of Entropy Balance.

5 I treat the effect of the protest as an ITT—instead of an average treatment effect (ATE)—because, despite the high salience of the protest, there is a pos­ sibility that some respondents in the treatment group did not take the treatment (exposure to the protest). Unfortunately, the ESS does not include salience measures that would allow me to check to what extent respondents seem to have been aware of the protest—as suggested by Mu˜noz et al. (2020). Given that noncompliance is a possibility and that I have no way of checking whether or not it does take place, treating the effect as an ITT is more appropriate (Mu˜noz et al. 2020, pp. 198–199).

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

7

22nd. While the design does not allow me to test how long the effect would last beyond these ten days, an effect lasting ten days is rather long-lasting when compared to studies using similar designs. For example, Balcells and Torrats-Espinosa (2018) report the effect of terrorist attacks on attitudes up to five days after their occurrence. The Online Appendix provides a number of robustness checks for these analyses, which test whether the assumption of UESD designs are met. In the first place, I change the bandwidth of days around the protest that are included in the analyses. I run power analyses to know how much the bandwidth can be decreased while still keeping power above 0.8, and replicate the analyses using every possible bandwidth that keeps power above that value. The results of this exercise are shown in Fig. A.5. Fig. A.6 shows no evidence of attrition, as proxied by the share of non-responses in the treatment and control group. I also check for violations of the exclusion assumption. The placebo shown in Fig. 3 that uses the median date in the control group as the treatment date already discarded the possibility that there might be pre-existing trends in the evolution of dependent variables inside the control group. To further test for violations of this assumption, Fig. A.7 replicates this placebo using a large number of dates in the control group as the treatment date. None of these analyses is close to statistical significance, and there is no discernible trend in the findings. I also replicate the main analyses using the remaining countries included in ESS5. As shown in Fig. A.8, there is no effect when one draws upon these countries. Fig. A.9 shows that the results are not being driven by the specific day of the week in which each

respondent was interviewed, as they do not change after the inclusion of fixed effects that control for the day of the week in which each respondent was interviewed. Fig. A.10 shows that the results hold if one removes respondents interviewed in the day of the protest. Finally, Fig. A.11 rules out a potential alternative explanation: that a significant share of the ESS5 respondents might have attended the demonstration itself. I find a very similar effect after removing all respondents who report to have taken place in a demonstration in the last 12 months. Finding an effect in reducing specific support is a necessary first step to showing that individuals are becoming more critical. However, this finding is compatible with two other interpretations. In the first place, individuals may be becoming more disaffected, if the reduction in spe­ cific political support is coupled with a decrease in interest for politics and efficacy. In the second place, they may be becoming more undem­ ocratic, if this finding is coupled with an increase in authoritarianism. For this reason, I follow this first step with two others, which are meant to disentangle whether the protest made individuals more critical, more

Fig. 3. Effect of the protest on public opinion, and placebo using the median date in the control group as treatment date. Notes: All dependent variables are standardized. Lines represent 95% Confidence Intervals.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

8

disengaged, or more undemocratic.6

I start with testing whether individuals are becoming more dis­ affected, by checking if the decrease in political support is accompanied of a decrease in political interest and efficacy. Unfortunately, ESS5 does not include efficacy variables. As such, I proxy efficacy with efforts in seeking for information about politics—which significantly correlate with political efficacy (Tewksbury et al. 2008). I thus replicate the an­ alyses in Fig. 3, using interest for politics and time spent reading about politics in the newspaper, listening to political news on the radio and watching political news on TV as dependent variables. The results, shown in Fig. 4, suggest that the protest did not increase disaffection— if anything, it made citizens more engaged in politics. Exposure to the protest did not depress political interest, whose value is strikingly similar in the control and treatment groups. In turn, there is an increase in the variables that tap the efforts in seeking for information about politics. The effect on time spent reading about politics on the newspaper and listening to political news on the radio both reach sta­ tistical significance, with effect sizes around half a standard deviation. This is quite remarkable since reading newspapers is an active, effort- consuming way of accessing news about politics, which has been found to have a higher impact on acquisition of information about politics than

other kinds of media consumption (Miller et al. 1988; Moeller et al., 2014). As a last step, I test whether the results are compatible with in­ dividuals becoming more undemocratic—meaning that the reduction in specific political support would be accompanied of an increase in authoritarianism. Unfortunately, ESS5 does not include questions on how respondents feel about democracy as a form of government. Hence, I proxy it with items that measure support for law and order (level of support for the statement that laws should be strictly obeyed, and that criminals should suffer harsher sentences), values that are significantly associated with authoritarianism (Inglehart 1977). The results, shown in Fig. 5, show no evidence of the protest making individuals more authoritarian. Exposure to the protest had no effect on support for law and order. The reduction in specific political support shown in Fig. 3 is not coupled with a reduction of diffuse political support. All in all, the analyses of this section suggest that exposure to the protest made individuals closer to the idea of critical citizens. It reduced their satisfaction with, and trust in, political elites—i.e., their specific political support. At the same time, it did not reduce their engagement in politics (if anything, it increased it), and it did not make respondents more authoritarian.

5. Making the political debate more relatable? Investigating the mechanism

I have argued that the effects shown in the previous section should be brought about by anti-austerity protests changing the pattern of the political debate. In opening the debate to civil society actors that do not usually take part in it, protests can make such debate more relatable. If this is indeed the mechanism in place, one should find that the protest increased the number of claims by civil society actors reported in the media; and that the effects of the protest were larger for individuals who were worse represented, in descriptive terms, by institutional elites such as MPs.

Fig. 4. More critical or more disaffected? Effect of the protest on political interest and efforts in seeking for information about politics. Notes: All dependent variables are standardized. Lines represent 95% Confidence Intervals.

6 These analyses will be carried out by replacing the main outcomes with the outcomes associated with each alternative explanation. An alternative approach might be to use these outcomes as control variables in the main models. However, in this design all variables are measured at the same moment (in the same survey). This means that, for individuals in the treatment group, all their covariates are measured post-treatment. For this reason, one must be careful not to use control or balancing variables that may have been affected by the treatment (Mu˜noz et al. 2020) to avoid concerns of post-treatment biases (Montgomery et al. 2018; King and Zeng 2006). The variables used as outcomes in this section are likely to have been themselves affected by the treatment— that it is, indeed, what the subsequent analyses test for. This makes it impos­ sible to include them as controls, and provides the justification for the repli­ cation of the analyses with different outcomes.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

9

To test whether the protest opened the public debate to civil society actors, I conducted claims analysis of the newspaper O Público for the same duration as the fieldwork of ESS5. Claims analyses draw upon “strategic demands made by collective actors within a specific contested issue field” (Koopmans and Statham 1999, p. 206). O Público is one of the main daily newspapers in Portugal and it makes for an excellent source of data because it has an online archive with PDF versions that replicate the printed daily edition. It should be noted that newspapers in Portugal do not have clear ideological leanings or connections to polit­ ical parties. While it could be argued that newspapers are losing importance in the face of new technology and forms of communication, information in Portugal is still usually initiated in the press (Accornero 2017). Even online, the sharing of press pieces frequently forms the basis of the debate (Francisco 2010). As such, analyses of the press should still provide an accurate picture of the public debate in the country, with the advantage that archives are available and easily analyzable. To analyze whether the protest opened the debate to civil society actors, I selected all articles published during the fieldwork of ESS5 in Portugal that included a number of crisis-related keywords7 and which dealt with the economic and financial situation of Portugal. The claims included in these articles were coded according to the main actor that put them forward. A total of 574 claims were analyzed. The main actors were coded into six categories: state actors, political parties, profes­ sional organizations and groups, trade unions, civil society groups, and foreign actors. I analyze the effect of the protest on the number of claims by civil society actors that are reported in the media with resource to a difference-in-differences (DiD) model. DiD models calculate the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) based on comparisons of post- and pre-treatment values of units that are treated and units that are not. The

dependent variable is the number of claims put forward by each type of actor in each 10-day period included in the timespan of the ESS5 fieldwork. This yielded a total of 14 time periods, the last of which corresponds to the period between in which individuals included in the treatment group were interviewed (March 12th to 22nd 2011). Assuming that in the absence of the treatment treated and untreated units would follow parallel trends, the control group provides the missing potential outcome: the number of claims by civil society actors that would have been reported in the media, had the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca protest not taken place. The ATT was then calculated on the basis of a fixed-effects model, given by the following equation:

Yit = α + γi + λt + τDit + μit

where Yit is the dependent variable, number of claims by actor type i at time period t; γi is an actor type-level fixed effect that controls for time- invariant unobserved heterogeneity; D is a binary treatment indicator coded one for claims by civil society actors that happened after the protest, and zero for all others; λt is a period fixed effect that controls for similar trends; and τ is the ATT.

Fig. 6 shows the results. The panel on the left-hand side shows the evolution of the number of claims made by civil society actors (treat­ ment group) and the remaining ones (control group). It shows that trends were fairly parallel prior to the protest. However, after the protest took place, the number of claims by civil society actors increased remarkably compared to that of the control group. The panel on the right-hand side shows the coefficients from three DiD models. The first model is the standard difference-in-differences estimate for the causal effect of the protest on the num-ber of claims by non-institutionalized actors reported in the press. To avoid concerns of overestimation of t- statistics and significance levels that are sometimes associated with DiD models, the second model simply compares pre-treatment time periods to the post-treatment time period (Bertrand et al. 2004). Finally, the last model presents a placebo that assumes the previous time point (t - 1) as the moment of the administration of the treatment. Should the parallel trends assumption hold, one should find this placebo to have no effect.

Fig. 5. More critical or more authoritarian? Effect of the protest on support for law and order. Notes: All dependent variables are standardized. Lines represent 95% Confidence Intervals.

7 These keywords were “economic crisis”, “austerity”, “public debt”, “na­ tional debt”, “sovereign debt”, “recession”, and “precarity".

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

10

Depending on the model specification, the ATT is between 6 and 7 claims per 10-day period—a large effect, which is also statistically sig­ nificant. In turn, the placebo using t - 1 has a much smaller effect, and one that is far from traditional thresholds of statistical significance. Moreover, this effect goes in the opposite direction of the main one. These analyses support the argument put forward in the paper regarding the mechanism. The protest caused a large increase in the number of crisis-relate claims by non-institutionalized actors that were reported in the press. The second step to testing the mechanism is to look at which in­ dividuals were more affected by exposure to the protest. I have argued that the effect should be driven by an increasing relatability of the debate as a consequence of the protest voicing new actors in it. Should this be the case, one should find the effect to be higher for individuals who feel like institutionalized elites, namely MPs, are more unrelatable. These are likely individuals who are worse represented, in descriptive terms, by MPs. According to Freire and Coller (2019, p. 100), individuals below 36 years of age, individuals with up to primary education, and women were groups descriptively underrepresented in the Portuguese parliament at the time of the protest. Another variable that should make individuals more descriptively underrepresented is their region of origin: the majority of MPs in Portugal are from Lisbon (the capital of the country), home to only around 5% of the country’s population. Hence, one should the effect to have a larger effect on individuals living outside Lisbon,8 up to 36 years old, with up to primary education, and who identify as female.9

To put these expectations to test, I split the sample so as to compare these sub-groups, and then replicate the main analyses as shown in Fig. 3 for each subsample. Unfortunately, the Entropy balance algorithm does not always converge in these subsamples. For these reasons, I report the

analyses only with the set of parametric controls used in Fig. 3. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The effect is stronger for individuals living outside Lisbon; for individuals not older than 36; and with up to primary education—although not all differences reach traditional thresholds of statistical significance. In turn, there is no noticeable difference in the effect size for individuals identifying as male and fe­ male. This is likely due to the fact that Portuguese parties have, in recent years, made significant efforts to improve the descriptive representation of women. As a consequence, women are less underrepresented in the Portuguese legislative than they used to be (Baum and Espírito-Santo 2012; Freire and Coller 2019, but see Verge and Espírito-Santo 2016). The growing descriptive representation of women in the country may justify why the effect on this group is not higher. Overall, these analyses suggest that individuals who were worse represented, in descriptive terms, by MPs were the ones who more affected by the protest. Finally, I test for a potential alternative mechanism. It could be argued that the findings are simply the result of a persuasion effect. The increased number of claims by civil society actors that was brought about by the protest could have changed people’s policy positions. If individuals changed their preferences as a consequence of the protest and evaluated negatively the efforts of political elites in addressing those preferences, they could become more critical of their performance. Should this be the case, the mechanism behind the findings shown in the previous section would be different from the one put forward in the theoretical argument. To test for this alternative mechanism, I compare the policy positions that are related to the issue of the protest in individuals in the treatment and control groups. Concretely, I look at respondents’ views on whether the government should make efforts to reduce poverty and inequality because the main claims of the protest were related to precarity (Baumgarten 2013). The results are shown in Fig. 8. There is no change in either of the dependent variables after the protest.

6. Discussion and conclusion

Democratic participation is about being critical. It is about critically assessing alternative visions for society as a whole, judging the feasi­ bility of those visions, and evaluating who is more capable of delivering them. As such, far from a threat to democracy, the existence of a body of critical citizenry pushing for a constant re-evaluation of the democratic

Fig. 6. Did the protest voice new actors in the public debate? Effect of the protest on the number of claims by civil society actors reported in the press (DiD models). Notes: Lines represent 95% Confidence Intervals. The models include actor-level and period fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by actor. In the left-hand panel, the dotted vertical line represents the date of the protest.

8 One might worry that this variable captures instead the extent of exposure to the protest. However, given that the protest happened all across the country, this is unlikely the case.

9 While ethnicity would be another obvious candidate, to run the analyses on ethnic subsamples is unfortunately not possible. Portugal is a very ethnically homogeneous country, and the whole ESS sample includes only 36 individuals from ethnic minorities. Of these, only one was interviewed after the protest took place, invalidating the comparison of effects across ethnic groups.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

11

process has been regarded as beneficial for it (Klingemann 1998). This paper has looked at the of anti-austerity demonstrations in the creation of such a critical citizenry. Anti-austerity protests change the pattern of the political debate in their countries, voicing civil society

actors instead of elites. This change is likely to make individuals feel that such debate has become more relatable. As a consequence, they are likely to think more critically about the performance of their elites. The empirical analyses have drawn upon a large anti-austerity

Fig. 7. Who was more affected by exposure to the protest? Heterogeneous treatment effects. Notes: All dependent variables are standardized. Lines represent 95% Confidence Intervals. All analyses include parametric controls.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

12

protest in Portugal— the Geraç˜ao `a Rasca demonstration on March 12th, 2011— that happened amid a period of low mobilization. Taking advantage of the fact that the protest happened during the fieldwork of ESS5 in the country, the results show that exposure to the demonstration made individuals significantly more critical of the performance of po­ litical elites. Importantly, however, this reduction in specific support does not come hand-in-hand with individuals becoming more disen­ gaged from politics—which would mean that they would have become more disaffected. If anything, exposure to the protest increased their efforts in seeking information about politics. I also find no evidence that the protest made individuals more authoritarian—which would mean that they would have become more undemocratic—-, as proxied by their support for law and order. Supporting the argument regarding the mechanism, the protest also caused an increase in the number of claims by non-institutionalized actors that were reported in the press. I also find some evidence that the effect is stronger for individuals who were more underrepresented, in descriptive terms, by MPs. These findings have important implications for the way we concep­ tualize the importance of unconventional forms of political participa­ tion. Protests can help bridge the gap between citizens and the political debate in their country. If we consider the existence of a mass of citizens who are able to critically judge the performance of their rulers as a necessary condition for a vibrant democracy, the analyses in this paper suggest protests can have a crucial role in the quality of democracy in their countries. The paper also speaks to participatory theories of democracy (Barber 1984; Pateman, 1970, 2012). These theories have long argued that participation in non-governmental spheres makes individuals learn and acquire tools that make them more capable of critically assessing their rulers. The findings of this paper show that not only one’s participation, but also the participation of others, can have such an impact. While anti-austerity protests constitute an alternative to conventional politics, they significantly affect the way individuals perceive conventional politics. This impact may have been important, for example, in changing patterns of voting behavior that led to the reshaping of South European

party systems in the aftermath of the Great Recession. Finally, the paper adds to our understanding of how the way in­ dividuals identify with their political environment affects their engagement in politics. The literature on descriptive representation has long looked at the effect of having elected representatives that mirror the citizenry on a number of outcomes. The findings of this paper extend this argument by showing that not only resemblance to elected repre­ sentatives, but also citizens’ resemblance to other participants in the public debate, can affect their engagement.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Britta Baumgarten, Elias Dinas, Florian Foos, Rob Johns, Bilyana Petrova, Toni Rodon, Katerina Tertytchnaya, Annabelle Wittels, and participants in the EPOP 2018 and EPSA 2019 conferences for their very helpful comments on previous versions of the manuscript. This research was funded by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, grant SFRH/BD/135089/2017.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.electstud.2021.102339.

References

Accornero, Guya, 2017. The mediation of the Portuguese anti-austerity protest cycle. In: Papaioan-nou, Tao, Gupta, Sumna (Eds.), Media Representations of Anti-austerity Protests in the EU. Routledge, New York, pp. 188–205. Accornero, Guya, Pinto, Pedro Ramos, 2015. “‘Mild mannered’ ? protest and Mo- bilisation in Portugal under austerity, 2010–2013”. W. Eur. Polit. 38 (3), 491–515.

Fig. 8. Change in the debate or persuasion? Effect of the protest on respondents’ policy positions. Notes: All dependent variables are standardized. Lines represent 95% Confidence Intervals.

V. Valentim

Electoral Studies 72 (2021) 102339

13

Anderson, Christopher J., Guillory, Christine A., 1997. Political institutions and sat- isfaction with democracy: a cross-national analysis of consensus and majoritarian systems. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 91 (1), 66–81. Atkeson, Lonna Rae, 2003. Not all cues are created equal: the conditional impact of female candidates on political engagement. Publisher: The University of Chicago Press J. Polit. 65 (4), 1040–1061. Atkeson, Lonna Rae, Carrillo, Nancy, 2007. More is better: the influence of col-lective female descriptive representation on external efficacy. Polit. Gend. 3 (1), 79–101. Balcells, Laia, Torrats-Espinosa, Gerard, 2018. Using a natural experiment to es-timate the electoral consequences of terrorist attacks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Unit. States Am. 115 (42), 10624–10629. Banaszak, Lee Ann, Ondercin, Heather L., 2016. Public opinion as a movement outcome: the case of the U.S. Women’s movement. Mobilization: Int. Q. 21 (3), 361–378. Barber, Benjamin, 1984. Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age. Google- Books-ID: 2YbevnCXAhgC. University of California Press, Oakland, CA. Baum, Michael, Espírito-Santo, Ana, 2012. “Portugal’s quota-parity law: an anal- ysis of its adoption”. W. Eur. Polit. 35 (2), 319–342. Baumgarten, Britta, 2013. Geraç˜ao `a Rasca and beyond: mobilizations in Portugal after 12 March 2011. Curr. Sociol. 61 (4), 457–473. Bertrand, Marianne, Duflo, Esther, Mullainathan, Sendhil, 2004. How much should we trust differences-in-differences estimates? Q. J. Econ. 119 (1), 249–275. Blais, Andr´e, 2007. Turnout in elections. In: Dalton, Russell J., Klingemann, Hans-Dieter (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Political Behavior. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 623–635. Branton, Regina, Martinez-Ebers, Valerie, Carey, Tony E., Matsubayashi, Tetsuya, 2015. Social protest and policy attitudes: the case of the 2006 immigrant rallies. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 59 (2), 390–402. Burns, Nancy, Lehman Schlozman, Kay, Verba, Sidney, 2001. The Private Roots of Public Action. Google-Books-ID: BM8YrTaavDwC. Harvard University Press. Bursztyn, Leonardo, Egorov, Georgy, Fiorin, Stefano, 2017. From Extreme to Main- Stream: How Social Norms Unravel. Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research. Bursztyn, Leonardo, Gonz´alez, Alessandra L., Yanagizawa-Drott, David, 2018. Mis- perceived Social Norms: Female Labor Force Participation in Saudi Arabia. Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research. Christensen, Henrik Serup, 2016. All the same? Examining the link between three kinds of political dissatisfaction and protest. Comp. Eur. Polit. 14 (6), 781–801. Dalton, Russell J., 2013. Citizen Politics: Public Opinion and Political Parties in Advanced Industrial Democracies. CQ Press, Thousand Oaks, CA. Dalton, Russell J., van Sickle, Alix, 2005. The Resource, Structural, and Cultural Bases of Protest. De Sousa, Luís, Magalh˜aes, Pedro C., Amaral, Luciano, 2014. Sovereign debt and governance failures: Portuguese democracy and the financial crisis. Publisher: Sage Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA Am. Behav. Sci. 58 (12), 1517–1541. Della Porta, Donatella, Mattoni, Alice, 2014. Spreading Protest: Social Movements in Times of Crisis. ECPR Press, Colchester. Dinas, Elias, Martínez, Sergi, Valentim, Vicente, 2020. The Normalization of Stig-Matized Political Symbols. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3516831. Rochester, NY. Social Science Research Network. Expresso, 2011. Ades˜ao de 300 mil pessoas superou expectativas da organizaç˜ao. Library Catalog expresso.pt. Fominaya, Cristina Flesher, 2017. European anti-austerity and pro-democracy protests in the wake of the global financial crisis. Soc. Mov. Stud. 16 (1), 1–20. Francisco, K´arita Cristina, 2010. “O jornalismo e as redes sociais: participaç˜ao, inovaç˜ao ou repetiç˜ao de modelos tradicionais?” Revista PRISMA. COM 12, 1–26. Franklin, Mark N., 2004. Voter Turnout and the Dynamics of Electoral Competition in Es- Tablished Democracies since 1945. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Freire, Andr´e, Coller, Xavier, 2019. Social distance and ideological congruence be-tween MPs and citizens. In: Fernandes, Jorge M., Leston-Bandeira, Cristina (Eds.), The Iberian Legislatures in Comparative Perspective. Routledge, London, pp. 91–110. Freire, Andr´e, Santana-Pereira, Jos´e, 2012. Portugal 2011: tthe victory of the ne- oliberal right, the defeat of the left. Publisher: Intellect, Portuguese J. Soc. Sci. 11 (2), 179–187. Frye, Timothy, Borisova, Ekaterina, 2019. Elections, protest, and trust in govern-ment: a natural experiment from Russia. J. Polit. 81 (3), 000–000. Gerbaudo, Paolo, 2017. The indignant citizen: anti-austerity movements in southern Europe and the anti-oligarchic reclaiming of citizenship. Soc. Mov. Stud. 16 (1), 36–50. Gerhards, Jürgen, Sch¨afer, Mike S., 2010. Is the internet a better public sphere? Comparing old and new media in the USA and Germany. New Media Soc. 12 (1), 143–160. Gillion, Daniel Q., 2012. Protest and congressional behavior: assessing racial and ethnic minority protests in the district. J. Polit. 74 (4), 950–962. Hainmueller, Jens, 2012. “Entropy balancing for causal effects: a multivariate reweighting method to produce balanced samples in observational studies”. Polit. Anal. 20 (1), 25–46. Hainmueller, Jens, Xu, Yiping, 2013. Ebalance: a stata package for entropy bal-ancing. J. Stat. Software 54 (7), 1–18. Hansen, Susan B., 1997. “Talking about politics: gender and contextual effects on political proselytizing”. J. Polit. 59 (1), 73–103. Hofferbert, Richard I., Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, 2001. Democracy and its discon-tents in post-wall Germany. Publisher: Sage Publications 6 Bonhill Street, London EC2A 4PU, UK Int. Polit. Sci. Rev. 22 (4), 363–378.

Imbens, Guido W., Lemieux, Thomas, 2008. Regression discontinuity designs: a guide to practice. J. Econom. 142 (2), 615–635. Inglehart, Ronald, 1977. The silent revolution in Europe: intergenerational change in post-industrial societies. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 65 (4), 991–1017. Inglehart, Ronald, Catterberg, Gabriela, 2002. Trends in political action: the devel- opmental trend and the post-honeymoon decline. Int. J. Comp. Sociol. 43 (3–5), 300–316. Inglehart, Ronald, Welzel, Christian, 2005. Modernization, Cultural Change, and Democracy: the Human Development Sequence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Johnson, Hank, 2011. State and Social Movements. Polity Press, Cambridge. King, Gary, Zeng, Langche, 2006. The dangers of extreme counterfactuals. Pub-lisher: Cambridge University Press Polit. Anal. 14 (2), 131–159. Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, 1998. Mapping political support in the 1990s: a global anal- ysis. In: Critical Citizens: Global Sypport for Democratic Governance, vols. 31–56. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Koopmans, Ruud, 2010. Winners and losers, supporters and opponents in Europeanized public debates. vol. The Making of a European Public Sphere. In: Koopmans, Ruud, Statham, Paul (Eds.), The Making of a European Public Sphere. Media Discourse and Political Contention, vols. 97–121. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Koopmans, Ruud, Statham, Paul, 1999. Political claims analysis: integrating protest event and political discourse approaches. Mobilization: Int. Q. 4 (2), 203–221. Kriesi, Hanspeter, 2018. The implications of the euro crisis for democracy. J. Eur. Publ. Pol. 25 (1), 59–82. Madestam, Andreas, Shoag, Daniel, Veuger, Stan, Yanagizawa-Drott, David, 2013. Do political protests matter? Evidence from the Tea Party movement. Q. J. Econ. 128 (4), 1633–1685. Magalh˜aes, Pedro C., 2012. After the bailout: responsibility, policy, and valence in the Portuguese legislative election of June 2011. S. Eur. Soc. Polit. 17 (2), 309–327. Magalh˜aes, Pedro C., 2005. “Disaffected democrats: political attitudes and political action in Portugal”. W. Eur. Polit. 28 (5), 973–991. Mansbridge, Jane, 1999. Should blacks represent blacks and women represent women? A contingent" yes". J. Polit. 61 (3), 628–657. Mazumder, Soumyajit, 2018. “The persistent effect of US civil rights protests on political attitudes”. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 62 (4), 922–935. Miller, M. Mark, Singletary, Michael M., Chen, Shu-Ling, 1988. The roper question and television vs. Newspapers as sources of news. Journal. Q. 65, 12–19. Moeller, Judith, de Vreese, Claes, Frank, Esser, Kunz, Ruth, 2014. Pathway to political participation: the influence of online and offline news media on internal efficacy and turnout of first-time voters. Am. Behav. Sci. 58 (5), 689–700. Montgomery, Jacob M., Nyhan, Brendan, Torres, Michelle, 2018. How conditioning on posttreatment variables can ruin your experiment and what to do about it. Publisher: Wiley Online Library Am. J. Polit. Sci. 62 (3), 760–775. Mu˜noz, Jordi, Falc´o-Gimeno, Albert, Hern´andez, Enrique, 2020. Unexpected event during survey design: promise and pitfalls for causal inference. Publisher: Cambridge University Press Polit. Anal. 28 (2), 186–206. Norris, Pippa, 1999. Critical Citizens. Global Support for Democratic Governance. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Norris, Pippa, 2011. Democratic Deficit: Critical Citizens Revisited. Cambridge Uni- versity Press, Cambridge. Pateman, Carole, 1970. Participation and Democratic Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pateman, Carole, 2012. Participatory democracy revisited. Perspect. Polit. 10 (1), 7–19. Pitkin, Hanna Fenichel, 1967. The Concept of Representation. Univ of California Press, Berkeley. Tarrow, Sidney, 2011. Global, conventional and warring movements and the suppression of contention. Themes in contentious politics research. Política Sociedade 10 (18), 25–50. Teperoglou, Eftichia, Freire, Andr´e, Andreadis, Ioannis, Viegas, Jos´e Manuel Leite, 2014. “Elites’ and voters’ attitudes towards austerity policies and their consequences in Greece and Portugal”. S. Eur. Soc. Polit. 19 (4), 457–476. Tewksbury, David, Hals, Michelle L., Bibart, Allyson, 2008. The efficacy of news browsing: the relationship of news consumption style to social and political effi-cacy. Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc Journal. Mass Commun. Q. 85 (2), 257–272. Torcal, Mariano, 2001. La desafecci´on en las nuevas democracias del sur de Europa y Latinoam´erica. Revista Instituciones y Desarrollo 8 (9), 229–280. Trenz, Hans-J¨org, 2004. Media coverage on European governance: exploring the euro- pean public sphere in national quality newspapers. Eur. J. Commun. 19 (3), 291–319. Valentim, Vicente, 2021. Parliamentary representation and the normalization of radical right support. Comp. Polit. Stud. Forthcoming. Valentim, Vicente, 2019. “What affects media commentators’ views of protest actions? Evidence from the Portuguese wave of anti-austerity contention”. Soc. Mov. Stud. 18 (2), 215–232. Verge, T`ania, Espírito-Santo, Ana, 2016. Interactions between party and legislative quotas: candidate selection and quota compliance in Portugal and Spain. Gov. Oppos. 51 (3), 416–439. Wolbrecht, Christina, Campbell, David E., 2007. Leading by example: female mem-bers of parliament as political role models. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 51 (4). Zetterberg, P¨ar, 2009. Do gender quotas foster women’s political engagement?: lessons from Latin America. Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc Polit. Res. Q. 62 (4), 715–730.

V. Valentim