Western Kentucky University Western Kentucky University TopSCHOLAR® TopSCHOLAR®

Honors College Capstone Experience/Thesis Projects Honors College at WKU

2020

A Comparative Analysis of Institutional Trust, Traditional Social A Comparative Analysis of Institutional Trust, Traditional Social Values, and Partisanship in East and Southeast Asia Values, and Partisanship in East and Southeast Asia

Lucas Knight Western Kentucky University, lucas.knight078@topper.wku.edu

Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.wku.edu/stu_hon_theses

Part of the International Relations Commons

Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Knight, Lucas, "A Comparative Analysis of Institutional Trust, Traditional Social Values, and Partisanship in East and Southeast Asia" (2020). Honors College Capstone Experience/Thesis Projects. Paper 860. https://digitalcommons.wku.edu/stu_hon_theses/860

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by TopSCHOLAR®. It has been accepted for inclusion in Honors College Capstone Experience/Thesis Projects by an authorized administrator of TopSCHOLAR®. For more information, please contact topscholar@wku.edu.

A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF INSTITUTIONAL TRUST, TRADITIONAL

SOCIAL VALUES, AND PARTISANSHIP IN EAST AND SOUTHEAST ASIA

A Capstone Project Presented in Partial Fulfillment

of the Requirements for the Degree Bachelor of Arts

with Mahurin Honors College Graduate Distinction

at Western Kentucky University

By

Lucas Knight

May 2020

CE/T Committee:

Professor Timothy Rich, Chair

Professor Jeffrey Budziak

Professor Elizabeth Gish

Copyright by

Lucas Knight

2020

ii

ABSTRACT

What factors drive an individual to trust, or not trust, their government? Over the

past two decades, an extensive literature has developed that seeks to identify the sources

and determinants of institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia. While this literature has

solidified around several factors, for example, positive evaluations of economic

performance or anti-corruption efforts, there is still significant debate on the importance

of others. This study seeks to contribute to this ongoing debate by testing the role of

traditionalism or traditional social values and partisanship. Utilizing data on 13 countries

from Wave 4 of the Asian Barometer Survey and controlling for a range of commonly

identified determinants of institutional trust, this study uses regression analysis to test to

what extent traditional social values and partisanship shape individual-level institutional

trust, both at the regional, aggregate level as well as on a country by country basis. While

traditional social values quite consistently display a positive, significant relationship with

institutional trust, the role of partisanship is less consistent, varying from country to

country.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank Dr. Timothy Rich, not only for his support and advice

during this project, but also for his guidance on a host of topics over the course of my

undergraduate career. Similarly, I would like to thank Dr. Jeffrey Budziak and Dr.

Elizabeth Gish for their willingness to serve on my CE/T committee and for their

feedback on this paper. Without the support of my committee, this project would not have

been possible, and I am extremely grateful for their time and effort. I would also like to

thank Dr. Patricia Minter, who I’ve had the chance to learn from in the classroom and

work with through a number of organizations. Her work and obvious dedication to her

students and community push me to be both a better student and better person. I also

want to thank my friends and family for all of their support, and their willingness to let

me vent, over the past several years. Finally, I would like to thank the Asian Barometer

Project for providing access to the dataset used in this paper.

iv

VITA

EDUCATION

Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, KY August 2021

B.A. in Political Science, International Affairs, and Asian Religions and Cultures – Mahurin Honors College Graduate Honors Capstone: A Comparative Analysis of Institutional Trust, Traditional Social Values, and Partisanship in East and Southeast Asia

Carol Martin Gatton Academy of Mathematics and Science May 2016

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

City of Owensboro Community Development Department May 2019 Community Development Specialist Aug. 2019

AWARDS AND HONORS

Critical Language Scholarship Recipient, Summer 2018 TUSA Global Ambassador Scholarship Recipient, Summer 2017 Faculty Undergraduate Student Engagement Grant Recipient, Spring 2017

PRESENTATIONS

Knight, L. (2018, March). Opinions on Free Trade Policies in Taiwan. Oral presentation presented at the 2018 WKU Student Research Conference. Bowling Green, KY

Knight, L. (2018, January). Opinions on Free Trade Policies in Taiwan. Oral presentation presented at the 2018 Southern Political Science Association Conference. New Orleans, LA.

.

v

CONTENTS

Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………... ii

Acknowledgements……………………………………………………………………... iii

Vita………………………………………………………………………………………. iv

List of Tables and Figures………………………………………………………………..vi

Introduction………………………………………………………………………………. 1

Literature Review and Hypotheses………………………………………………………. 6

Institutional Trust and Traditional Social Values……………………………………… 24

Institutional Trust and Partisanship…………………………………………………….. 48

Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………… 65

References……………………………………………………………………………… 70

Appendix…………………………………………………………………………………73

vi

LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES

Table 1.1: Responses to Social Trust Questions…………………………………………31

Table 1.2: Mean TSV Scores by Country………………………………………………..34

Table 1.3: Mean Trust Level by Country (Trust Index 1)……………………………….37

Table 1.4: Trust Index 1 Regional-Level OLS Regression………………………………38

Table 1.5: Trust Index 1 OLS Regression with Social Trust Index……………………...43

Table 1.6: Trust Index 2 OLS Regional-Level OLS Regression………………………...45

Figure 2.1: Mean Trust Level by Voter Category………………………………………..50

Table 2.1: Distribution of Winners, Losers, and Non-Voters……………………………52

Table 2.2: Mean Trust Level by Institution Type………………………………………..55

Table 2.3: General Institutional Trust Regional-Level OLS Regression………………...56

Table 2.4: Partisan Institutional Trust Regional-Level OLS Regression………………..59

Table 2.5: Neutral Institutional Trust Regional-Level OLS Regression………………...60

1

INTRODUCTION

To what extent does an individual trust his or her government? What factors, if

any, shape that level of trust? Are these levels of trust consistent across all governmental

institutions and actors, or do they vary? On the surface, these types of questions tap into a

relatively simple concept - why and to what extent individuals trust their government.

However, even a cursory glance at the academic literature on these topics, a literature

concerned with investigating the determinants and impacts of what is commonly termed

political or institutional trust, reveals an incredibly complex and still-contentious field of

study.

Why should we care about institutional trust? The reasons are many and varied.

To take just a few examples, while Grönlund and Setälä (2007) acknowledge the mixed

results found in the literature on the topic, using survey data from the 2002-2003

European Social Survey, they find that, even when controlling for a wide variety of

demographic and attitudinal variables, trust in parliament exerts a significant, positive

influence on voter turnout at the regional level, and this relationship holds for eleven of

the twenty countries included in the survey. While it is certainly possible to debate the

normative aspect of whether increased levels of turnout are good or bad, this is an

important outcome of institutional trust regardless.

Looking at the impact of institutional trust from a different direction, Evers and

Gesthuizen (2011) investigate what impact institutional trust has on donation behavior,

and they find that higher levels of individual-level institutional trust lead to increased

2

levels of donations to what they term “activist” and “leisure” organizations, and higher

aggregate levels of individual trust at the country level, indicative of greater general faith

in the institutions in those countries, leads to significantly lower levels of donations.

Intriguingly, Hudson (2006), looking at EU data, makes the case that, when controlling

for a host of other factors, trust in several international institutions as well national

government, coded as a binary 0 or 1, has a significant and positive impact on levels of

happiness. While no means comprehensive, the impressive breadth of topics that these

studies cover, ranging from voter behavior to individual happiness, emphasizes the many

consequences of higher institutional trust. The practical importance of these effects

suggests a fuller understanding of both the determinants and implications of institutional

trust is warranted. It is on the former, the determinants of institutional trust, that I focus

this analysis.

In this work, I seek to contribute to this growing literature, specifically as it

relates to institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia, through the lenses of a few key

questions. One, for countries in East and Southeast Asia, what influences individual-level

trust in government? Two, are there certain approaches that more effectively explain

levels of individual-level institutional trust? And three, are there any broad

generalizations that can be made about institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia, or

do the explanations about institutional trust vary from country to country? While I choose

to focus more heavily on the determinants of institutional trust rather than the outcomes

of institutional trust, this study joins a growing number of works looking at both aspects

across the globe. As Marien and Hooghe (2011) note, “In recent years, the topic [political

or institutional trust] has attracted renewed attention in the scholarly literature as a

3

reaction to various studies documenting a structural decline in levels of political trust –

most notably in the United States,” (pg. 267). Moreover, this study seeks to contribute to

a growing regional literature on institutional trust, what Park (2017) identifies as the

study of institutional trust in the Asia-Pacific.

Park’s work also offers a few reasons as to why further attention deserves to be

paid to the study of institutional trust in the Asia-Pacific more broadly and East and

Southeast Asia in particular. In brief, the region is one, “… of greater cultural and

religious diversity…” and, “… varies widely by the type of regime and mode of

governance,” (Park 2017, pg. 488). While areas like Western Europe have some

diversity, the greater regional diversity of East and Southeast Asia permits studies of

institutional trust to account for a wider variety of factors. For one example, Shi (2001)

was able to use the shared cultural background but wildly different regime types present

in Taiwan and China to isolate the impact of cultural factors and regime types on

institutional trust, something that would not have been possible in a region of well established democracies.

Additionally, the trends in overall levels of institutional trust that Marien and

Hooghe (2011) discuss are not as easily apparent in East and Southeast Asia. Looking at

data points from 17 different countries in the Asia-Pacific between 1996 and 2011, Park

(2017) identifies four different patterns of fluctuations in institutional trust, only two of

which appear to be trending downwards. If even the general trends of institutional trust in

the region do not fully mirror the global experience, it is especially important for further

studies to test whether commonly accepted determinants of institutional trust hold up to

scrutiny when tested in East and Southeast Asia. While this question will be more fully

4

explored in the literature review, one example of cause for such concern can be found in

a study by Kim (2005), who calls into question the relationship between institutional trust

and social capital in South Korea, a relationship put forward and tested in Western

countries by scholars like Putnam. These types of studies should make us hesitant to

blindly accept that such relationships are easily transferable from region to region.

In the following sections, I utilize data from Wave 4 of the Asian Barometer

Survey1, covering 14 countries in East and Southeast Asia and conducted between 2014

and 2016, to investigate several potential determinants of institutional trust. I place

particular emphasis on the roles of traditional social values and partisanship, variables

that to date have received comparatively little attention in the wider literature. In the

literature review, I elaborate on two broad approaches to explaining levels of institutional

trust while also documenting and exploring the impacts of methodological

inconsistencies in the literature on what conclusions can be drawn about institutional trust

in the region. Additionally, it is from this analysis that I derive two hypotheses and

identify several variables that need to be tested in the later quantitative sections.

Following this review of the literature, I include two quantitative chapters, each

consisting of a section detailing the data and methods used and a section detailing the

results of the analysis. While both chapters contain an array of independent variables, the

first chapter specifically investigates the relationship between traditional social values

and institutional trust while the second chapter focuses on partisanship. After this

1 Data analyzed in this paper were collected by the Asian Barometer Project (2013-2016), which was codirected by Professors Fu Hu and Yun-han Chu and received major funding support from Taiwan’s Ministry of Education, Academia Sinica and National Taiwan University. The Asian Barometer Project Office (www.asianbarometer.org) is solely responsible for the data distribution. I appreciate the assistance in providing data by the institutes and individuals aforementioned. The views expressed herein are my own.

5

analysis is complete, I conclude the paper with a reflection on the broad implications of

the results of the analysis and potential avenues for future research.

6

LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESES

An analysis of the literature surrounding individual-level institutional trust in East

and Southeast Asia reveals a substantial amount of internal debate. In this literature

review, I provide an overview of two of the major debates observable in the literature.

The first is somewhat more explicitly methodological in nature. When discussing

individual-level trust in government, which parts of government and other institutions are

being referred to? I argue that the literature takes two broad approaches to this topic, and,

importantly, an analysis of these two approaches suggests that this methodological

distinction appears to have meaningful implications for analysis on what factors influence

institutional trust. Second, I provide an overview of the main debate in the literature, that

being which factors are the key determinants of individuals’ trust in government. This

section includes not only a listing of competing explanations but also attempts to assess

the extent to which the current literature supports said explanations, and in which areas

the literature could be improved or further developed.

Methodological Distinctions

Beginning with the first debate, a review of the relevant literature produces two

relatively clear trends in terms of which institutions authors utilize to test determinants of

individual-level trust in government. First, a portion of the literature largely limits its

analysis to a subset of institutions. For example, Kim (2005), in a study that looks at

political trust in South Korea, limits his analysis to parliament and political parties. Wang

(2013) utilizes two different sets of institutions when measuring political trust in China,

7

South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan, first looking at the presidency or prime minister as well

as the national government and then later looking at trust in the central and the local

government levels. Similarly, Park (2017) limits his regression analysis of institutional

trust to an indexed score utilizing responses to questions about trust in the national

government and parliament. What is particularly worth noting is that both Wang (2013)

and Park (2017) utilize various waves of Asian Barometer data, which offers trust data on

a large suite of institutions ranging from the national government, to courts, to the police,

to the armed forces, to the media, and Park (2017) even includes much of this data in a

descriptive discussion of trends in trust in East Asia before focusing in only two

categories to conduct further analysis.

By contrast, another subset of the literature employs a much more broad-based

approach to the topic. For example, Zhai (2016), in his analysis of institutional trust in

China, not only includes a greater list of institutions by looking at parliament, political

parties, the national government, and courts, but he also includes trust in governmental

officials as another avenue of analysis, while Tang (2011) extends this further, adding the

presidency, the civil service, the military, the police, and local government to his models.

In summary, at the methodological level, there is broad variance from study to study as to

which institutions are considered when attempting to statistically test the determinants of

political trust, and these differences persist despite the availability of data concerning

much a more expansive set of institutions.

Justifications as to why some studies select a small battery of institutions while

others work with a much more holistic one vary. One justification for the selection of

parliament and political parties as the only institutions simply asserts that trust in

8

parliament is the best measure available because parliament is preeminent in a

representative system (Kim 2005). Sometimes the explanations are not fully developed.

For example, the extent to which Park (2017) discusses why an index of only trust in

national government and parliament is used to conducted regression analysis is limited to

a brief statement that they are the, “… political branches of government,” (pg. 501).

However, there are studies that limit their selection of institutions while more fully

developing their reasoning. Chi and Kwon (2016), when looking at the impact of

perceived inequality on trust in Taiwan and South Korea borrow from Mishler and Rose

(2001) and Chang and Chu (2006), limiting themselves to a list of six institutions. Chang

and Chu (2006) themselves, when looking at the relationship between corruption and

political trust in East Asia, borrow the framework from Mishler and Rose (2001). Mishler

and Rose (2001), in a study of trust of 10 post-Communist countries in Eurasia, base their

decision to limit themselves to six institutions (parliament, the prime minister/president,

courts, police, political parties, and the military) out of an original list of 11 due to

analysis that found those institutions accounted for the lion’s share of variance in trust,

and they additionally note that repeating their analysis with all 11 institutions results in

no meaningful change in results. While it would have been potentially worthwhile to see

either Chang and Chu (2006) or Chi and Kwon (2016) repeat the analysis that led to such

a decision to limit the range of institutions with new data sets in a new region, but the

logic used to arrive at this decision is easy to follow.

Importantly, the literature suggests that differences in which institutions are

included in the analysis have an impact on the results. One way in which this materializes

can be seen in the work of Tang and Huhe (2016), who find that decentralization has a

9

statistically significant impact on political trust, but the direction of this relationship is

different depending on whether local or national trust is being measured and whether the

regime is authoritarian or democratic. In particular, in authoritarian regimes

decentralization has a negative impact on local trust and a positive impact on national

trust, whereas decentralization leads to a significant, positive increase in local trust in

democracies and loses significance at the national level (Tang and Huhe 2016).

Disregarding for the moment the differences based on regime type, just the differences in

the way that decentralization influences trust when looking at local government versus

national government suggests a greater need to carefully consider what institutions

researchers choose to study in future research.

A study by Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) also highlights potential consequences of

only using a small battery of institutions in measurements of trust, as they find that

partisanship does not equally impact trust in all institutions. Instead, they find that trust in

what they term “partisan institutions” like the president or prime minister and parliament

is more strongly impacted by partisanship than in “neutral institutions” like the civil

service and the military. While Park (2017) measures whether respondents voted for the

winner or loser the last election, and Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) measure partisanship

explicitly as identification with the party in power or with opposition parties, Park

concludes that the partisan bias quantified by this winner/loser split does not have an

impact in Mongolia for political trust measured with two institutions, whereas Huang,

Lee, and Lin find a significant relationship between partisanship and trust in Mongolia

for a subset of the institutions they measure. While some of this difference may be in how

partisanship is being measured, the design of Park’s study prevents this question from

10

being answered by not considering a wider variety of institutions. Finally, Yang and Tang

(2010) look at a set of 13 political institutions in China and utilize factor analysis to

divide them into administrative, legal, and societal categories, and they find that a variety

of potential determinants of individual trust in institutions have different effects

depending on the category of institution under discussion. Altogether, the findings in

these studies and the different conclusion reached by Park and Huang, Lee, and Lin’s

reinforce the notion that there are differences in the determinants of political trust across

a wide range of institutions, and a failure to include a wider range of institutions when

testing institutional trust has the potential to generate conclusions that do not accurately

reflect the full complexity of the factors that impact institutional trust in East and

Southeast Asia.

Debates on the Determinants of Institutional Trust

The second major debate in the literature centers around which factors best

explain individual-level institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia. While there are

various ways one might categorize potential determinants, this paper utilizes a framework

put forward by a number of studies (e.g. Wong, Wan, and Hsiao 2011; Tang 2011; Zhai

2016; Wang 2013; Yang and Tang 2010; Mishler and Rose 2001; Ma and Yang 2014),

dividing approaches into two large categories: institutional approaches and cultural

approaches. To elaborate more, Wong, Wan, and Hsiao (2011) borrow from Mishler and

Rose (2001) in splitting up the relevant literature between institutional and cultural

approaches, and in their review of the relevant literature they argue that the institutional

approach centers around rational evaluations of the performance of government. When

testing the institutional approach, the authors measure such a rational evaluation via

11

economic performance, as represented by handling of the economy and unemployment,

and political performance, as represented by views governmental handling of political

corruption and human rights issues. There appears to be in the literature a broad-based

agreement on at least some of the factors that fall under the institutional approach, as

numerous studies (e.g. Tang 2011; Huang, Lee, and Lin 2013; Wang 2013; Shi 2001)

incorporate measures designed to capture economic performance and/or issues with

corruption.

However, this is not the only way in which studies have attempted to measure

evaluations of governmental performance. Mujani and Liddle (2013) utilize an index

consisting of responses to five questions such as satisfaction with the current government,

likeliness of the government to solve what respondents viewed as a serious problem, ease

of access to services like help from the police, and so on, focusing on these types of

issues in addition to questions regarding economic performance rather than topics like

corruption. Park (2017) also employs a slightly different approach, creating categories of

policy performance, including economic performance, security, and anti-poverty efforts,

and process performance, measured by a sub-set of topics related to rule of law. The

benefit of this type of approach is that it allows for analysis to tease out further details

about which factors shape individual-level trust institutional trust and to control for

potential competing explanations. For example, returning to the topic of economic

performance as a determinant of trust, Park (2017) finds that views on the national

economy are much better predictors of political trust in East Asia than perceptions of the

respondent’s own economic situation. These varying approaches showcase that, even

with a general agreement in the literature on these important aspects of the institutional

12

approach, the constituent methods used to measure such performance can vary to some

extent from study to study. And, small variations in the methods used can help contribute

to a greater overall understanding of the institutional factors that shape institutional trust.

Moreover, there are several potential determinants analyzed in the literature that

might not fit entirely with the definition of institutional trust provided by Wong, Wan,

and Hsiao (2011), but might fit under an expanded definition. First, both Park (2017) and

Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) incorporate media exposure as a potential determinant of

trust, something seen as a significant, negative determinant of trust in portions of the

African literature (Hutchison 2011; Hutchison and Johnson 2011), and Huang, Lee, and

Lin explicitly include it in an evaluation of governmental performance while Park lists it

as an alternative explanation. However, the findings of these two papers provide slightly

different results. Both Park (2017) and Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) utilize Asian

Barometer Survey data to measure the impact of media exposure, although Park utilizes a

combination of waves 1, 2, and 3 of the ABS as available and Huang, Lee, and Lin limit

their analysis to the wave 3 data. Both studies use different sets of additional variables as

controls and independent variables, and the question used within these surveys simply

asks how often respondents view news about government or politics.

Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), when looking at Korea, Taiwan, Mongolia, the

Philippines, Thailand, and Indonesia, find that only in Korea is there a significant,

negative impact of media consumption on institutional trust that persists in a generalized

analysis of institutional trust as well as when controlling for partisan versus neutral

institutions, although in the Philippines there is a significant, positive influence on trust in

neutral institutions. Park (2017), in a battery of ten countries, including all six countries

13

tested by the aforementioned paper, measures trust only in national government and

parliament, and finds a significant effect for media exposure in the Philippines and

Cambodia. It is difficult to ascertain what, exactly, is driving this difference in findings. It

may be that the limited range of institutions that make up the trust measure in Park’s

paper leads to differing conclusions, but in the Asian context media exposure appears to

be a comparatively unreliable determinant of institutional trust as it is only significant in

a small number of countries.

However, it is worth noting that there are potential concerns about using such a

simple measure of media exposure. For example, Ceron (2015) utilizes data from 27

countries in the Eurobarometer survey dataset to investigate the impact on institutional

trust, indexed as trust in the national government, regional and local governments,

parliament, and political parties, of exposure to different types of news media,

particularly government and traditional media websites versus social media. Ceron

(2015) finds that higher rates of social media news consumption decrease trust, while

such consumption from governmental and traditional media websites actually increases

trust. Moreover, in testing the impact on trust of news consumption from non-web-based

sources, press and radio news consumption significantly increased trust, while TV news

had no effect (Ceron 2015).

Applying these findings to the East and Southeast Asian context, then, it raises the

potential that either the data available through the Asian Barometer Survey is simply not

detailed enough to accurately test more nuanced relationships or that the analyses

themselves are not nuanced enough. Luckily, a study by Wu (2014) looking at trust of the

courts and police in China and Taiwan utilizes second wave ABS data to measure the

14

impact of varying forms of media consumption and highlights that it is possible to control

for the amount of Internet use among respondents as well as whether they utilize

television or newspapers as their primary source of information. The results are again

somewhat inconclusive, with the only significant relationship between types of media

consumption and trust in the police/courts being that in China those who consumed

foreign news were less likely to trust these two institutions (Wu 2014). But the

methodology utilized in the study suggests that it is possible to in more detail analyze the

impact of media exposure on various institutions in the region with available data. And, it

would be of benefit to the literature to do so, if only to more firmly demonstrate the

inconsistent relationship between media exposure and institutional trust.

Similarly, there is some discussion in the relevant literature on the role of

government type and electoral systems. Tang and Huhe (2016) find that whether a

country is a democracy or autocracy, measured either on a dichotomous scale or via

Polity’s index, has an important interaction effect when it comes to measuring the impact

of decentralization on political trust. This suggests that the generalized type of

government a country operates under, while not directly impacting individual trust, may

still need to be incorporated into models to control for any potential interactions with

other variables. Focusing on a slightly different area, Park (2017) notes differences in the

influence of winning or losing the last election on trust in both competitive authoritarian

and electoral systems, arguing that electoral systems that disproportionately create losers

have a larger influence on changes in institutional trust.

Unfortunately, there appears to be comparatively little literature focused on East

and Southeast Asia that explicitly analyzes the differences between different electoral

15

systems or electoral outcomes, although literature from outside the region suggests some

ways in which the topic might be approached. For example, Cho (2012) conducts a study

of 16 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, seeking to test to what extent differences in

electoral systems, particularly majoritarian versus proportional representation systems,

influence political trust in the legislatures of those countries. Conducting a multi-level

analysis and controlling for factors including election quality, economic conditions,

winner/loser divide, demographic variables, and so on, feelings of accountability towards

legislators had no significant impact on trust whereas feelings of representation had a

significant, positive impact on trust (Cho 2012). Accountability played no greater role in

majoritarian systems than PR systems, and PR systems were significantly more able to

translate feelings of representation into trust as compared to majoritarian systems (Cho

2012). At a minimum, these findings suggest that in some regions differences in electoral

systems have a wider sphere of influence than only the relationship between the

winner/loser divide and institutional trust, and it would benefit the East and Southeast

Asian literature to pursue this direction moving forward.

Looking at the topic from a different angle, Marien (2011) utilizes data from

Europe and focuses not on the type of electoral system being utilized by a country but

instead the impact of overall proportionality of the outcomes on political trust in

parliament, politicians, and political parties. Controlling, for various demographic

variables, institutional performance, the winner/loser divide, good governance, the age of

the regime, and GDP per capita, Marien (2011) finds a curvilinear relationship between

institutional trust and proportionality; very proportional and very disproportional election

outcomes both lead to significant, positive increases in trust, which she suggests would

16

explain why previous empirical analyses have, when attempting to model this

relationship linearly, found contradictory results on the impact of proportionality on

political trust. Again, however, a review of the East and Southeast Asian literature on

trust did not turn up studies that have attempted to apply this process to the region, which

suggests yet another way forward that could help expand on the impact of electoral

systems on political trust in the region. Altogether, although the role of electoral systems

may be a factor that does not explicitly fall under a restrictive definition of the

institutional approach, it seems reasonable to include it under a discussion of the

institutional approach expanded to incorporate the impact of the structural design of

governmental systems.

Returning to the other half of this debate, Wong, Wan, and Hsiao (2011) define

the cultural approach to understanding institutional trust as one that acknowledges the

impact of unique cultural backgrounds, noting that these backgrounds can influence the

way in which people might otherwise rationally evaluate the performance of their

government. One commonly tested method that the literature suggests may explain the

way in which the cultural background of a person might influence trust is Putnam’s social

capital theory, which several studies (e.g. Kim 2005; Wang 2013; Huang, Lee, and Lin

2013) break down into social trust and civic engagement. On this topic, Huang, Lee, and

Lin (2013) conclude that social trust is a better explanatory variable than civic

engagement when controlling for other factors such as economic performance and

partisanship. Perhaps due to similar sentiments among other researchers, social trust has

also found application in several studies separate from civic engagement (e.g. Mujani and

Liddle 2013; Tang 2011; Park 2017) but there appears to be significant variation between

17

studies that incorporate social trust, or even both social trust and civic engagement, as to

whether it is a significant determinant of individual institutional trust in all cases.

To look further into this variation, it is helpful to focus on several studies with

differing results. Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), Park (2017), and Wang (2013) all

operationalize social trust in the same way, utilizing a dichotomous variable indicating

whether respondents feel that other people can, generally, be trusted, but each study uses

different controls, different countries, different institutions that make up its institutional

trust measure, and different combinations of waves of the Asian Barometer Survey data.

And, potentially due to these differences, the conclusions that these three studies draw

experience noticeable variation. Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) find that social trust is a

significant, positive determinant of institutional trust for at least one subset of institutions

they analyze, with institutions being grouped into partisan and neutral categories in

addition to a general trust score, in all six countries - Korea, Taiwan, Mongolia,

Philippines, Thailand, and Indonesia - they study. Park (2017) adds an additional four

countries, for example, Japan, to those used in Huang, Lee, and Lin’s study, and he finds

that for only three countries of the 10 studied – South Korea, Mongolia, and Indonesia does social trust have a significant impact on institutional trust, and it is positive in each

case. While there is some agreement here, then, the two studies find diverging

conclusions on Taiwan, the Philippines, and Thailand. Finally, Wang (2013) finds that

social trust has a significant, positive impact on institutional trust in an aggregate data set

from Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea, but upon disaggregating this data down to the

country level the relationship remains only in South Korea. What these disparate results

suggest is that, even when a variable like social trust is being operationalized in the same

18

way, studies manage to find contradictory results that call into question which finding is

correct.

Moreover, due to the lack of a consensus as to which index to use for institutional

trust, which controls to incorporate in an analysis, and which years of survey data to

include, there is no immediately available way such comparisons might be made. This

issue is further compounded by the fact that Mujani and Liddle (2013) operationalize

social trust differently, creating an index from responses to five questions rather than

relying on a single dichotomous variable, and conclude that social trust has a significant,

positive impact on institutional trust across all seven countries they study. If comparing

this study to only one of the three mentioned above, one might simply suggest that

variance in how studies measure social trust is the issue. But, these contradictory results,

both with and without contradictions in this area, suggest that studies sharing at a

minimum more than one methodological feature are necessary to resolve these issues.

Finally, a not-insignificant amount of discussion has been dedicated to what

extent traditionalism or traditional values play in shaping political trust. Wong, Wan, and

Hsiao (2011) found no significant relationship between traditionalism and institutional

trust, but their measure of traditionalism centered around the superiority of one’s

traditional culture over another. By contrast, a number of studies, both looking at China

in particular (e.g. Yang and Tang 2010; Zhai 2016) or in multi-country studies (e.g. Shi

2001; Tang 2011; Ikeda 2013) have put forward the argument that some form of what is

often called traditional social values, placing an emphasis on topics like attitudes towards

hierarchy derived from the historical context of the East and Southeast Asian region,

contribute to levels of political trust in the region. To borrow one explicit definition,

19

Ikeda (2013) argues that, “This measure [the traditional social values measure] reflects

‘social values’ in daily social settings and positive attitudes toward paternalism, harmony

orientation, and collectivism,” (pg. 20).

Looking at the China-focused studies first, Yang and Tang (2010) look at trust in

a battery of 13 different institutions, utilizing factor analysis to group them into

administrative, legal, and societal categories. Yang and Tang (2010) narrow down their

measure of traditional values to one category closely associated with Confucian

traditions, attitudes towards hierarchy, and find that when controlling for other variables

related to modernization, government performance, and the impact of mobilization efforts

by the Chinese government, this measure of traditional values leads to a significant,

positive increase in trust across all categories of institutions. Zhai (2016), however, takes

a broader view of the topic, suggesting that although traditional values in China can be

linked not only to Confucianism, but other religious and quasi-religious traditions like

Daoism and Buddhism, it is possible to quantify these attitudes with a set of 11 questions

and then sub-divide them into categories of family, social, and political values. Zhai

(2016) finds that traditional social and traditional political values have a significant,

positive impact on trust in both institutions (parliament, parties, the national government,

and courts) and governmental officials, while traditional family values maintained this

relationship only for officials. Altogether, these findings suggest that despite broad

differences in the range of interpretation of traditional values, the operationalization of

this interpretation, and differing sets of institutions, at least in the case of China,

traditional social values are meaningful determinants of political trust.

20

In cross-country comparison studies, the impact of traditional social values on

institutional trust is inconsistent, and it, unfortunately, marks a return to the types of

issues found in a number of studies utilizing social trust. Tang (2011), measuring

traditional social values via six questions broadly related to attitudes towards authority,

views on conflict, and collective wellbeing, finds a positive relationship between this

variable and institutional trust across the region, but there is no available regression-style

analysis of this relationship present in the study. Due to the lack of such an analysis, and

the subsequent commentary on the strength of the relationship relative to other factors, it

is difficult to rely on that conclusion. By contrast, Wang (2013) finds that in Japan,

South Korea, and Taiwan, traditional social values, as measured with a battery of three

questions, do not significantly influence political trust. But Ikeda (2013), looking at an

aggregate data set of individuals from 11 countries in East and Southeast Asia finds that

traditional social values have a significant, positive impact on political trust at the

individual level, if not at the country level. What is to be made of these differences?

Again, Ikeda (2013) and Wang (2013) utilize different waves of Asian Barometer Data,

operationalize the measure via different methods, not only in that Ikeda uses a more

expansive battery of questions but that the phrasing of many questions themselves

changed from Wave 2 to Wave 3 of the ABS, and differ in the controls used, all of which

has the potential to cause the observed differences. In much the same way that the area of

social trust likely requires a convergence on methodology in order to come to more firm

conclusions about the role it plays in shaping political trust in East and Southeast Asia,

such convergence will likely be necessary for the role of traditional social values.

21

In a more general sense, what conclusions can we draw from the wider literature?

First, while the claim that the institutional approach to understanding institutional trust is

superior (e.g. Wong, Wan, and Hsiao 2011; Park 2017) may be premature, the assertion

that “… national economic well-being and control of corruption play the most consistent

role in determining political trust…” (Park 2017 pg. 503) is harder to dispute. Studies by

Park (2017), Wong, Wan, and Hsiao (2011), Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), Tang and Huhe

(2016), and Wang (2013) all examine more than one country utilizing various

methodological frameworks and find perceptions of corruption and economic

performance are, generally, significant determinants of institutional trust. In other words,

the consistent, significant presence of these measures across studies, apparent even

despite differences in methodology, is a comparative rarity in the literature and therefore

a meaningful reason to target a policy at one of these two areas if the goal of a policy

proposal is to be applicable in as many contexts as possible. Wang (2013) provides

further justification to focus on corruption, as he finds the positive impact on trust of

increased evaluations of governmental performance is limited to a large extent when a

person has concerns about corruption.

Because of the consistency associated with the institutional approach across the

wider literature, I will focus less on this approach to understanding institutional trust in

this study. I will still control for such variables in my analysis, but in an effort to provide

a greater contribution to the literature, I choose to on areas of continued debate. For this

reason, more focus will be paid to understanding specific aspects of the cultural approach

to institutional trust.

22

Second, one issue that repeatedly surfaces in the wider literature is a lack of

methodological consistency, an issue that likely needs to be resolved moving forward.

How to begin to resolve this issue, however, is a difficult question. Not only are there

serious differences in methodology associated with meaningful differences in conclusions

not only in the battery of institutions utilized to create a measure of political trust, as the

discussion in the first debate highlights, but also as it relates to determinants of

institutional trust themselves. Any suggestions aimed at correcting these methodological

differences, then, should target at least one of these areas.

It is my recommendation that, in an effort to begin to address such

methodological inconsistencies, it would be beneficial to come to an agreement on a

minimum battery of institutions to include in any index of institutional trust. At a

minimum, the justifications utilized by Mishler and Rose (2001) and then implemented in

several other studies (Chang and Chu 2006; Chi and Kwon 2016), wherein the battery of

institutions consists of parliament, the prime minister/president, police, the military,

courts, and the police, provide an acceptable baseline. This is not to suggest that there be

no flexibility in terms of grouping institutions for analysis. But it is important that such

decisions are made with sound reasoning behind them, as done with statistical

justification by Yang and Tang (2010), in order to tap into a theme that non-grouped

institutions could not, as done by Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) for partisanship, or due to

data restrictions. Moving forward into the quantitative analysis chapters, I will attempt to

consistently utilize such a broader definition of institutional trust.

Keeping these conclusions in mind, and cognizant of the vast number of potential

avenues by which to investigate the determinants of institutional trust, I choose to narrow

23

my focus down to three key topics, two of which I develop into hypotheses and one

which, while not a hypothesis, I still devote a portion of the analysis to. First, using Wave

4 data from the Asian Barometer Survey, what is the relationship between traditional

social values and institutional trust at the regional and country-level in East and Southeast

Asia? Second, can we attribute the inconsistent results associated with measures of social

capital to differences in the operationalization of variables? And third, building on the

work of Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), what is the relationship between partisanship and

institutional trust when controlling for a wider number of additional variables, including

traditional social values? Keeping in mind the relevant discussion of the current state of

the literature on these topics, I put forward the following hypotheses:

Hypothesis 1: Controlling for other factors, traditional social values should positively

correlate with institutional trust.

Hypothesis 2: Controlling for other factors, voting for the winning party of the last

election should positively correlate with institutional trust. The magnitude of this

relationship should be diminished for non-partisan institutions.

24

INSTITUTIONAL TRUST AND TRADITIONAL SOCIAL VALUES

Data and Methods

This project utilizes data from the 4th Wave of the Asian Barometer Survey

(ABS), which contains survey results from 14 different countries and territories in East

and Southeast Asia (Japan, Hong Kong, South Korea, China, Mongolia, the Philippines,

Taiwan, Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore, Vietnam, Cambodia, Malaysia, and Myanmar).

The surveys constituting the 4th Wave of the ABS were conducted between 2014 and

20162, and sample sizes for each individual country range from approximately 1,000

respondents to as many as 4,000, with a regional sample size of 19,467. Of interest for

this research project, the ABS survey provides a relatively holistic battery of questions

suitable for an investigation into the potential determinants of institutional trust. Not only

does the ABS survey contain a battery of questions designed to measure trust in 13

different political and non-political institutions, but it also has sections dedicated to voter

behavior, social trust and social capital, views on governmental performance,

traditionalism, and so on. It should be noted, however, that due to certain restrictions on

the questions asked in a subset of the 4th Wave countries, particularly as it relates to

questions on trust in various institutions, there is some limit to the extent that cross national comparisons can be made.

2 Surveys in each country were conducted in the following time periods: Taiwan – June through November 2014; Singapore - October through December 2014; Philippines – July 2014; Mongolia – June through August 2014; Thailand – August through October 2014; Malaysia – September through November 2014; China – December 2014 through June 2016; Myanmar – January through March 2015; Indonesia – January 2016; Vietnam – September through October 2015; Hong Kong – February through April 2016; Japan – March 2016; South Korea – October through December 2015; Cambodia October through November 2015.

25

Dependent Variable

One of the most important methodological decisions in this project is what

method to use to operationalize institutional trust. As highlighted in the literature review,

there are a wide array of methods used in the relevant literature, many of them with their

own potential benefits and issues. However, in line with my prior observations about the

current state of the literature, any method must fulfill two major criteria:

1. The method used should be applicable to as many countries in the dataset as

possible. This will not only allow for country-to-country comparisons to

determine whether the models developed in this paper work equally well in each

country contained in the sample, but it will also provide the most latitude for

future research on the topic to be compared against the results found in this paper.

2. The method should incorporate a relatively broad set of institutions into its

measurement of institutional trust. The review of the relevant literature suggests

that such choices matter, and studies that limit a definition of institutional trust to

only a small subset of institutions investigated in the ABS survey risk missing

valuable insights into the determinants of institutional trust.

Unfortunately, any operationalization method that attempts to fulfill both criteria

immediately runs into several issues. First, although the 4th Wave ABS Survey contains

questions on a battery of 13 separate institutions3, due to issues such as structural

differences between the 14 countries included in the survey, questions on trust in the

3 The full list includes: The president or prime minister, the courts, the national government located in the capital city, political parties, parliament, the civil service, the military or armed forces, the police, the local government, newspapers, television, the election commission, and NGOs. The election commission and NGOs are listed as optional questions in the survey.

26

executive office, political parties, local government, the election commission, and NGOs

are not asked in at least one country. As some of these, particularly institutions like the

executive office, seem quite relevant to a comprehensive measure of institutional trust,

this presents potential issues in attempts to create a model that works for every country in

the sample. Second, respondents in Vietnam were not presented the same answer choices

for the institutional trust questions as the rest of the sample. Respondents in every

country except Vietnam were presented with a 4-point Likert scale asking them to

indicate how much they trust each institution, ranging from “A great deal of trust” to

“None at all”, as well as options such as declining to answer. In Vietnam, however,

respondents have only three answers to indicate their level of trust: “A great deal of

trust,” “Quite a lot of trust,” or “Some trust.” This means that it is impossible to directly

compare Vietnam to the rest of the sample, and because of this I choose to exclude

Vietnam from the analysis entirely.

From there, I create two distinct indexes of institutional trust, Trust Index 1 to

apply to all 13 remaining countries in the sample and Trust Index 2 to apply to a nine country subset, the countries where questions about all of the institutions composing

Trust Index 2 were asked. The former utilizes only those questions pertaining to

institutions that were asked about in every country in the set and so excludes questions

regarding the executive branch of government, local government, political parties, the

election commission, and NGOs. Additionally, while there is likely some value in

knowing to what extent respondents trust T.V. and newspapers as sources of information,

I choose to not include these institutions in my indexed measure as they in many cases

are not explicitly political groups, a government branch, or otherwise a governmental

27

organ. As such, the first institutional trust index only contains respondents’ evaluations of

the courts, the national government, parliament, the civil service, the military, and the

police.

However, in order to have a measure that incorporates other important organs of

government like the executive office, I also choose to create a second index including

evaluations of all possible institutions excluding newspapers, television, and NGOs.

While this index applies to only nine countries in the set4 and necessitates running a

second set of models, this is the best compromise available between a model that

incorporates and allows comparisons between as many countries as possible and a model

that does not exclude potentially important institutions from its operationalization of

institutional trust.5 The first model, applicable to all 13 countries, will permit a full,

regional comparison, whereas the second model with allow for a more comprehensive

definition of institutional trust to be tested on a subset of countries. Moreover, at least for

the nine countries present in both sets of data, I will be able to directly compare the two

models to analyze what impact defining the dependent variable of analysis more

comprehensively has on the regression results.

Independent Variables

The various independent variables in this study draw heavily from prior literature

on the topic of institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia. First, in line with most of the

4 China, Singapore, Indonesia, and Hong Kong all fail to ask at least questions regarding at least one of the 10 institutions (The executive office, courts, national government, political parties, parliament, the civil service, the military, the police, the local government, and the election commission) included in this second index. 5 While there are slight variations in the mean level of trust as measured by Trust Index 1 and Trust Index 2 for the nine countries for which the two measures are applicable, this variance is in each case less than .1

28

previous literature, this project attempts to capture the impact of the evaluation of

governmental performance on institutional trust via a question on respondents’ views of

the current economic situation in their country. To measure this, I use Question 1 of the

4th Wave ABS Survey, which reads, “How would you rate the overall economic condition

of our country today?” utilizes a 5-point Likert scale ranging from very good (1) to very

bad (5), which I recoded as very bad (1) to very good (5). Additionally, in line with

works such as Park (2017), I also choose to include Question 4 of the ABS Survey, “As

for your own family, how do you rate the economic situation of your family today,” in

order to account for any potential difference in a respondent’s economic evaluation of

their personal situation versus the national situation. Question 4 is recoded in the same

manner as Question 1.

The second independent variable included in this study is corruption. While the

ABS Survey provides several different ways to tap into the issue of corruption, I choose

to follow a number of previous studies in looking at corruption through the lenses of

governmental efforts to combat corruption. To capture perceptions of anti-corruption

efforts, I utilize Question 119, which reads, “In your opinion, is the government working

to crack down on corruption and root out bribery?”. This is akin to the operationalization

of the variable as done by studies such as Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), although it might

also be reasonable to follow studies such as Park (2017) and Wang (2013), who use a

question asking about how widespread corrupt behavior is. Using Question 119,

respondents are presented with a 4-point Likert scale with response ranging from “It is

doing its best” (1) to “Doing nothing” (4), but I recode this variable so that “It is doing its

best” correlates to 4 and “Doing nothing” correlates to 1.

29

The third and fourth independent variables included in this study relate to social

capital. As discussed in the literature review, studies looking at social capital have taken a

few different approaches to this topic. Some restrict their analysis solely to social trust,

while others control for both this and membership in a variety of civic organizations. To

be as comprehensive as possible, I follow with the latter category, and as such I attempt

to capture the impact of social capital with two different variables. The first is

membership in a variety of civic organizations. Via the ABS Survey, this is captured with

questions 20-22, asking respondents to name various organizations that they belong to.

Wang (2013) uses the absolute number of organizations as a measure of this variable,

however, the 4th Wave data set contains a variable “fq” indicating whether the respondent

is a member of any formal organization which I have recoded from “Yes” (1) and “No”

(2) to a dichotomous variable where being a member of formal organization is coded as 1

and not being a member is coded as 0. This is in line with the way that Huang, Lee, and

Lin (2013) operationalize the variable. Additionally, I utilize two different methods to

capture social trust. First, in line with studies such as Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), Park

(2017), and Wang (2013), I utilize Question 23 of the ABS Survey, “Generally speaking,

would you say that ‘most people can be trusted’ or ‘that you must be careful in dealing

with people?” While this variable was initiated coded so that “Most people can be

trusted,” was a 1 and, “You must be very careful in dealing with people,” was a 2, I

recode this so that a value of 0 indicates a lack of trust in others and a value of 1 indicates

trust in other people. But, in order to test whether a different operationalization of social

trust would alter its relationship with institutional trust, I also follow the general method

put forward by Mujani and Liddle (2013) and construct an indexed measure of social

30

trust, utilizing questions 23 and 26-28 of the ABS survey6. Questions 26-28 ask

respondents to what extent they trust a subset of the population: relatives, neighbors, and

others you interact with, respectively. For each question, the response options consist of a

4-point Likert scale ranging from “A great deal of trust,” (1) to “None at all,” (4)7, with

these options recoded in reverse order. Once recoded, Questions 26-28 are converted into

values of 0 or 1 to indicate non-trusting or trusting and all and four questions are summed

to create an indexed social trust measure.

Of note, even a cursory glance at the distributions of answers to the questions

composing these two operationalizations suggests that the choice of method will

potentially affect the relationship between social trust and institutional trust. In Table 1.1

below, the responses to questions 26-28 have been recoded so that 0 represents not

trusting and 1 represents trusting. Missing values are not included in the table. For the

dichotomous measure of social trust commonly utilized in the literature, the vast majority

of the survey sample believes they must be careful in dealing with others. However, in

the case of trusting relatives and neighbors the lion’s share of the survey sample falls into

the trusting category. Moreover, while there does appear to be a decrease in trust as the

circle of people expands, at somewhere between 14-15% per stage, even when this is

extended to include the wider population that respondents interact with, most of the

survey believe they can trust others. This stands in direct contrast to the more common,

single-question measure of social trust, where only 28.8% of the sample felt that most

6 One of the questions used in the index created by Mujani and Liddle (2013) is not asked in Indonesia as part of the Wave 4 survey. In the interests of including Indonesia in the remainder of the analysis, I choose to use the other four questions to create a four-point scale. 7 The full range of responses is: “A great deal of trust” (1); “Quite a lot of trust” (2); “Not very much trust” (3); “None at all” (4).

31

people can be trusted. This disparity reinforces the notion that it will be useful to test both

measures of social trust in further analysis and compare to what extent the performance

of the two measures vary.

Table 1.1: Responses to Social Trust Questions

Social Trust Dichotomous

Measure

Trust in Relatives Trust in Neighbors

Trust in Others you Interact With

Frequency Percent Frequency Percent Frequency Percent Frequency Percent 0 13186 67.7 2410 12.4 5375 27.6 8050 41.4

1 5613 28.8 16787 86.2 13547 69.6 10651 54.7

Total 18800 96.6 19198 98.6 18922 97.2 18701 96.1

Fifth, one of the core independent variables in this project is the measure of the

respondent’s traditionalism, or traditional social values (TSV). While discussed in more

depth in the literature review, it is important to reiterate that there are a variety of ways in

which to conceivably operationalize this measure of traditionalism or TSV, ranging from

Wang, Wan, and Hsiao’s (2011) definition of traditionalism as belief in the supremacy of

one’s traditional culture over another society’s, to Wang’s (2013) three-question index, to

the various models that Ikeda (2013) develops based on prior research and analysis of the

Asian Barometer dataset. In this paper, I utilize a definition that Ikeda (2013) tests,

specifically the seven-question battery for an overarching traditionalism scale, for a few

key reasons.

First, as it relates to Wang, Wan, and Hsiao (2011), the measure they use to define

traditionalism is very specific, and rather than tapping into the extent that a respondent

holds onto traditional cultural beliefs, it instead seems likely to measure something akin

to cultural nationalism. By contrast, the models that Wang (2013) and Ikeda (2013)

32

utilize, based on data from prior waves of the Asian Barometer Survey, seem to much

more directly tap into cultural views. However, Wang (2013) chooses to utilize the 2nd

Wave of the Asian Barometer Survey, whereas Ikeda (2013) utilizes the 3rd Wave, and

this decision has important implications for the replicability of their respective models.

Between the 2nd and 3rd Waves of the Asian Barometer Survey, the battery of questions

related to traditionalism changed significantly, with 11 questions either having altered

wording or being entirely new in the 3rd Wave as compared to the 2nd Wave. By contrast,

the 3rd and 4th Wave sections on traditionalism are remarkably similar, with only a single

question having been removed in the latter survey. Importantly, this means that the

operationalization of traditionalism that Ikeda (2013) utilizes in his study on 3rd Wave

data can be replicated with the 4th Wave data used in this paper.

Each of the questions present in the 4th Wave survey’s battery on traditionalism are 4 point Likert scales, asking respondents to indicate to what extent they agree with a series

of statements, with responses ranging from “Strongly Agree” (1) to “Strongly Disagree”

(4). I first recode each of these variables so that “Strongly Disagree” corresponds to 1 and

“Strongly Agree” corresponds to 4. Then, I create an index following the method Ikeda

(2013) utilizes, incorporating the recoded variants of questions 55, 57, 60, 62, 63, 64, and

658, wherein the mean of the summed responses to these questions is calculated, forming

a new 1-4 scale.

8 Questions composing the scale: Q55 - “For the sake of the family, the individual should put his personal interests second.”; Q57 – “For the sake of national interest, individual interest could be sacrificed.”; Q60 - Even if parents’ demands are unreasonable, children still should do what they ask.”; Q62 – “Being a student, one should not question the authority of their teacher.”; Q63 – “In a group, we should avoid open quarrel to preserve the harmony of the group.”; Q64 – “Even if there is some disagreement with others, one should avoid the conflict.”; Q65 – “A person should not insist on his own opinion if his co-workers disagree with him.”

33

The prior literature on traditional social values in the region has largely focused

itself on what Tan and Tambyah (2011) term, “Confucian Asia” – China, Japan,

Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Vietnam, and Hong Kong. Tang (2011), for example,

makes an explicit connection to Confucianism, arguing that, “… we cannot conduct our

analysis by relying on perspectives taken from Western culturalism that make no

allowance for the importance of Confucian values in East Asian cultures,” (pg. 12). Wang

(2013) limits his analysis of traditionalism to only Confucian Asia, looking at China,

Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Yang and Tang (2010) similarly explicitly link attitudes

towards hierarchy with the Confucian tradition, and even Zhai (2016), who acknowledges

the influence of non-Confucian traditions on Chinese thought, limits in-depth analysis to

China and data-based comparisons of traditional values to Confucian Asia proper. These

studies showcase at least some consensus on the need to test the role of traditional social

values in shaping institutional trust in a subset of the wider region.

While there are certainly reasonable arguments to be made for the applicability of

the traditionalism measures as defined by the 4th Wave Asian Barometer Survey to be

applicable in what Tan and Tambyah (2011) term “Confucian Asia,” it is important to

discuss whether such a measure would be appropriate for the rest of the region. A simple

country-by-country comparison of the mean scores for the traditional social values

highlights an interesting trend that supports the assertion that the measure is capturing a

set of ideal and beliefs that are not solely limited to “Confucian Asia,”, but that is also

present across the wider ABS region and, as Ikeda (2013) notes in his study looking at all

11 East and Southeast Asian countries included in Wave 3 of the Asian Barometer

34

survey, potentially in other regions across the globe9. Countries that would seemingly

have more direct engagement with Confucian thought, for example, China, Taiwan,

Japan, and South Korea, fall on the lower end of the scales for the measure of

traditionalism, whereas the other countries in the 4th Wave data set actually exhibit higher

levels.

Table 1.2: Mean TSV Scores by Country

Mean TSV Scores by Country Country Mean TSV Value Japan 2.5 Hong Kong 2.52 Korea 2.57 China 2.75 Mongolia 3.01 Philippines 3.07 Taiwan 2.65 Thailand 2.91 Indonesia 3.12 Singapore 2.78 Cambodia 3.06 Malaysia 3.1 Myanmar 3.39

One potential explanation for this is that solely defining the set of beliefs that the

Asian Barometer traditionalism battery of questions attempts to capture as ‘Confucian’ is

incorrect; as Zhai (2016) notes while using this battery of questions to tap into the impact

of traditionalism on institutional trust in China, at least in the Chinese case Buddhism and

9 Specifically, Ikeda (2013) argues that, “What we mean by “Asian” in this essay is that the traditional social values detailed here are widely supported in the East/Southeast Asian area. It does not deny that the same value configuration has support in other areas of the world,” (pg. 20).

35

Taoism also play important roles in shaping traditional Chinese thought. That

traditionally “Confucian” Asia actually falls on the lower end of these two measures of

traditionalism, then, supports the assertion that the ABS measure is in fact picking up a

more wide-ranging set of beliefs, not solely Confucian beliefs. Understanding the ABS

measure of traditional social values in these terms, not as values ascribed to a single

tradition but as values that can be identified in a number of unique cultural backgrounds,

suggests that it is reasonable to apply such a measure to every country in the data set, not

just a sub-set therein.

Finally, the regression analysis conducted in this paper will include a variety of

additional control variables. In addition to traditional demographic variables such as age,

education, gender, and income, I also choose to include a Freedom House score for each

country so as to attempt to capture any facets of living in a comparatively more or less

authoritarian society that are not picked up by other variables used in my analysis. In

other words, this variable attempts to identify to what extent, controlling for other factors,

regime type influences institutional trust. In order to do this, I created a new variable in

the data set, “FreedomHouse,” setting the value of the variable to the Freedom House

score of the respondent’s country in the year that the survey was conducted.10

Taking in the full account of relevant variables, in the following section I will

conduct regression analysis on the 4th Wave ABS data set, testing the relationship

between traditional social values and institutional trust, controlling for the other

10 For the year that surveys were conducted, Myanmar did not receive a traditional PolityIV score, as the country underwent a transition in 2015. Additionally, Hong Kong as a territory does not receive a PolityIV Score. Because of these issues, and since every country/territory in this data set receives a Freedom House score, I choose to use Freedom House rather than PolityIV as a proxy for living in a more or less authoritarian system.

36

independent variables discussed above. This analysis will first be conducted on the full

13-country data set, utilizing Trust Index 1, and afterward this analysis will be re-run on

the nine-country data set, utilizing Trust Index 2. In each case, I will additionally dis aggregate the data set and re-run the analysis on a country by country level to pick up any

variation in the relative effectiveness of the models.

Results and Discussion

Before diving into detailed regression analysis of the determinants of institutional

trust, it is helpful to have a general understanding of the levels of institutional trust in the

13 countries under study. Table 1.3 below displays the mean value of Trust Index 1 by

country along with the respective countries’ Freedom House scores for the year that

surveys were conducted in that country. Based on Table 1.3, there is a noticeable level of

variance within the region. The mean for the entire region is 2.6894, and seven of the

thirteen countries’ average levels of institutional trust fall below this point. These levels

fall as low as 2.25 in South Korea and rise as high as 3.07 in China, .82 points on a scale

ranging from 1 to 4. In line with much of the recent discussion on low levels of political

trust in democratic societies, it is telling that it is the comparatively long-standing

democracies of the region, such as Taiwan, Japan, and South Korea, in which trust is

lowest. Moreover, of the six countries with a Freedom House score of six or less on the

overall 14-point scale11, five of them (Japan, South Korea, Mongolia, Philippines, and

Taiwan) all fall below the regional mean for political trust. These findings suggest reason

11 When utilizing the Freedom House measure, a lower score indicates that a country is relatively freer than a country with a higher score. As such, the fact that lower Freedom House scores seem to be associated with lower levels of institutional trust means that freer countries appear to have lower levels of institutional trust.

37

for concern among scholars tracking the decline in institutional trust in democracies

across the globe.

Table 1.3: Mean Trust Levels by Country (Trust Index 1)

Mean Trust Levels by Country for Trust Index 1 Country Mean Standard Error of Mean Freedom House Score Japan 2.48 0.02 2 Hong Kong 2.55 0.02 7 Korea 2.25 0.01 5 China 3.07 0.01 13 Mongolia 2.46 0.01 4 Philippines 2.51 0.02 6 Taiwan 2.28 0.01 3 Thailand 2.78 0.02 11 Indonesia 2.77 0.01 6 Singapore 3.05 0.02 8 Cambodia 2.73 0.02 11 Malaysia 2.98 0.02 8 Myanmar 2.41 0.02 11

Keeping this regional variation in mind, I first run OLS regression analysis on the

full thirteen-country data set with Trust Index 112 as the dependent variable, creating

three models. I test these models first for the regional data sample with all countries

included, and then I additionally test the models for each country. The first model

contains only factors that have regularly been investigated in the wider literature on

institutional trust in the region: Evaluations of the national and local economic situation,

perceptions of anti-corruption efforts, as well as social trust and social capital. In these

models, social trust is defined using a dichotomous variable derived from the response to

Question 23 from the ABS Survey. In Model 2, I introduce the measure of traditional

12 Trust Index 1 is composed of only trust in the courts, the national government, parliament, the civil service, the military, and the police.

38

social values (TSV) as operationalized by Ikeda (2013), Finally, Model 3 introduces

various other control variables, namely gender, education, income, and a Freedom House

score assigned by the related score of the respondent’s country.

Table 1.4 Trust Index 1 Regional-Level OLS Regression

Model Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

t Sig.

B Std. Error

Beta

1 (Constant) 1.358 0.024 56.035 0

National Economic Evaluations 0.205 0.005 0.324 40.568 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.009 0.006 0.012 1.482 0.138

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.227 0.006 0.297 39.104 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.076 0.01 0.057 7.719 0

Organizational Membership -0.027 0.009 -0.022 -2.973 0.003 2 (Constant) 0.981 0.033 29.591 0

National Economic Evaluations 0.195 0.005 0.309 38.753 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.008 0.006 0.01 1.258 0.208

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.219 0.006 0.287 37.975 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.098 0.01 0.073 9.931 0

Organizational Membership -0.042 0.009 -0.034 -4.625 0

Traditionalism Index 0.15 0.009 0.123 16.488 0 3 (Constant) 1.028 0.038 27.254 0

National Economic Evaluations 0.163 0.005 0.258 31.605 0 Family Economic Evaluations 0.029 0.006 0.036 4.665 0 Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.21 0.006 0.275 37.021 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.101 0.01 0.075 10.347 0

Organizational Membership 0.008 0.009 0.006 0.864 0.387

Traditionalism Index 0.102 0.009 0.084 11.016 0

Female 0 0.009 0 -0.053 0.957

Freedom House Score 0.026 0.001 0.151 18.513 0 Education -0.018 0.002 -0.076 -9.574 0

Income Quintiles 0.013 0.004 0.028 3.686 0 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .502a 0.252 0.252 0.5227 2 .516b 0.266 0.266 0.51767 3 .542c 0.294 0.293 0.50796

This regression analysis offers several useful insights, but it also raises a few

important questions. First, in every model, respondents’ evaluations of the national

economic situation (Q1) and evaluations of governmental anti-corruption efforts (Q119)

have a positive, significant impact on institutional trust. That these are consistent across

all three models and the magnitude of the associated coefficients are the largest in each

39

model reinforces the broader conclusion that can be drawn from the literature:

evaluations of governmental performance, utilizing the national economic situation as a

proxy, and evaluations of government anti-corruption efforts are reliable determinants of

institutional trust in the region. Interestingly, while respondents’ evaluations of their

family economic situation (Q4) do not reach significance in Model 1 or Model 2, it does

so in Model 3; however, even in Model 3 the coefficient is much smaller than the

coefficient associated with Q1.

Moreover, this trend continues when Trust Index 1 is tested on the country level13,

rather than considering the entire sample on aggregate. In each model where Q4 is

significant at p <= .05, it exerts a notably smaller, but still positive effect on institutional

trust than the evaluation of the national economic situation. Compounding this issue, at

the country level Q4 repeatedly fails to reach the level of significance. For Hong Kong,

South Korea, China, Thailand, Indonesia (p-value of .055 in Model 3) and Myanmar, Q4

is not significant in all three models. For Cambodia, and the Philippines, Q4 is only

significant in Model 3, in Taiwan it is significant in Model 2 and Model 3, although the

p-value in Model 1 is .053, and in Singapore Q4 is only significant in models 1 and 2,

failing to reach significance in Model 3.

What to make of these trends? At a minimum, while evaluations of familial

economic situation do seem to have some impact on levels of institutional trust at the

regional level, and in a small subset of the data at the country level, this impact is much

smaller as compared to evaluations of the national economic situation. Combine this with

13 See Appendix 1.1 for the country-level regression models; only model three is included for brevity.

40

the fact that Q4 so often fails to reach significance at the country level, and this suggests

that evaluations of the national economic situation are a more consistent determinant of

institutional trust than family economic evaluations. One potential explanation as to why

evaluations of family economic situation fail to significantly influence institutional trust

is that respondents might fail to link the particulars of their own economic situation to

government actions, reducing the role that this evaluation plays in shaping institutional

trust, whereas they more explicitly link the national economic situation to governmental

performance, more drastically influencing institutional trust.

Second, the various demographic and other control variables present something of

a mixed message. As it relates to the demographic controls, there does not appear to be

any particular pattern to be observed. The significance of gender, income, and education

varies greatly from country to country. Moreover, the direction of these relationships is

not consistent between the regional model and the country models, or even between

countries. By contrast, at the regional level the Freedom House score is significantly and

positively correlated with institutional trust; higher Freedom House scores, and therefore

‘less free’ countries, tend to have higher levels of institutional trust.

Third, this analysis offers some insight into the accuracy of Hypothesis 1. While

this model does not control for partisanship, at the regional level the seven-question

operationalization of traditional social values has a significant, positive impact on

institutional trust for both Model 2 and Model 3 (the two models which include TSV as a

variable). Admittedly, the magnitude of the coefficient in each model is somewhat lower

than the coefficients attached to questions about the national economic situation and anti corruption efforts. At the same time, the fact that it reaches significance at a p-value of 0

41

seems to suggest that, contrary to the findings of studies such as Wang (2013), traditional

social values do have a significant impact on shaping institutional trust in the region.

Moreover, these results are largely in line with the findings of Ikeda (2013), utilizing the

same operationalization of TSV on a new set of data, and this displays that there is at

least some degree of replicability over time in the impact of TSV on institutional trust.

In addition, whereas a country-level analysis casts doubt on the consistency of

evaluations of familial economic situations as a determinant of institutional trust, this

type of analysis instead further supports Hypothesis 1. There is some variance between

the magnitude of the associated coefficient for each country, but for all the countries in

the data set, the seven-question measure of traditional social values is statistically

significant to at least the .05 level. In terms of consistency, then, this places traditional

social values in the same category as the national economic situation and anti-corruption

efforts, by far the two most consistently significant determinants of institutional trust

tested in the broader literature. Altogether, then, I find initial evidence in support of

Hypothesis 1 based on an analysis of Trust Index 1, regardless of whether this analysis is

conducted on the regional sample or country-specific samples, although it is still

necessary to test this relationship when partisanship is factored into the model.

Moreover, this regression analysis offers some insights into the relationship

between social capital, both in terms of participation in organizations as well as social

trust, and institutional trust. At the regional level, membership in an organization displays

a significant relationship with institutional trust in Model 1 and Model 2. Surprisingly,

considering the wider literature’s predictions related to social capital, the direction of this

relationship is negative. However, there are two caveats to these results that call into

42

doubt the veracity of this relationship. For one, when controlling for gender, education,

income, and the Freedom House score of respondents in Model 3, membership in an

organization fails to reach significance with a p-value of .387. For another, the

relationship between institutional trust and organizational membership at the country level varies greatly from country to country. Of the 13 countries in the data set,

organizational membership reaches significance in at least one model in seven countries.

In Hong Kong, South Korea, Mongolia, Taiwan, Thailand, and Myanmar, organizational

membership has a significant and positive impact on institutional trust in all three models.

In Singapore, this relationship is negative but significant only for Model 1. In the other

six countries, the variable fails to reach significance with 95% certainty in any model. In

other words, the impact of organizational membership on political trust varies based on

location, and this level of variance at the country level potentially explains the

unexpected results at the regional level.

Finally, this analysis offers insight into the role that social trust plays in shaping

institutional trust. At the regional level, social trust as measured by a dichotomous

variable is significant in each of the three models tested, and this relationship between

social trust and institutional trust is positive. Relative to the magnitude of the coefficients

associated with anti-corruption efforts or evaluations of the national economy, the impact

of social trust is somewhat smaller. Again, however, the regional level analysis does not

tell the entire story. As compared to organizational membership, social trust performs

much better at the country level of analysis, having a significant, positive relationship

with institutional trust for all models in each country except Mongolia, Cambodia, and

43

Taiwan. For the former two countries, social trust is not significant in any model, and in

Taiwan it is only significant for Model 3.

Table 1.5: Trust Index One OLS Regression with Social Trust Index

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.252 0.024

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.202 0.005 0.321 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.004 0.006 0.004 0.564

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.215 0.006 0.282 0

Organizational Membership -0.035 0.009 -0.028 0

Social Trust Index 0.078 0.004 0.154 0 2 (Constant) 0.872 0.033 0 National Economic Evaluations 0.193 0.005 0.305 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.002 0.006 0.002 0.75

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.208 0.006 0.272 0

Organizational Membership -0.05 0.009 -0.04 0

Social Trust Index 0.081 0.004 0.16 0

Traditionalism Index 0.15 0.009 0.123 0 3 (Constant) 0.915 0.037

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.158 0.005 0.251 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.024 0.006 0.03 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.198 0.006 0.259 0

Organizational Membership 0.003 0.009 0.002 0.741

Social Trust Index 0.086 0.004 0.169 0

Traditionalism Index 0.1 0.009 0.082 0

Female 0.008 0.008 0.007 0.329 Education -0.019 0.002 -0.079 0 Income Quintiles 0.011 0.003 0.023 0.002

Freedom House Score 0.028 0.001 0.16 0 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .522a 0.272 0.272 0.51584

2 .536b 0.287 0.286 0.51062

3 .563c 0.317 0.317 0.49974

Using these results as a baseline, I run an additional round of analysis for both the

regional level and the country level in order to test the impact of operationalizing social

trust via two different methodologies. As part of this process, the models are identical

except for the fact that, rather than operationalizing social trust as a dichotomous

44

variable, I instead use the general method utilized by Mujani and Liddle (2013), creating

an index of responses to four separate questions14 to measure social trust. I test these new

models at both the regional and country level.15 Looking only at social trust, at the

regional level, while the size of the standardized coefficient associated with social trust is

notably larger than when a dichotomous measure is used, there is no difference in terms

of the direction of the relationship or the significance between social trust and

institutional trust dependent on the operationalization of social trust. Both

operationalizations have a significant, positive impact in all three models. At the country

level of analysis, however, there are some immediate differences. Whereas the

dichotomous measure of social trust fails to reach significance in Cambodia, Mongolia,

and in two models in Taiwan, the index operationalization achieves significance in every

model in each country. This result in some way supports the idea that divergent

operationalizations of social trust can result in different outcomes; there are differences in

the statistical significance of social trust dependent on the operationalization16. But these

differences are limited to only three of the thirteen countries analyzed, so differences in

operationalization cannot adequately explain the extent of the variation in results that

prior studies testing the relationship between social trust and institutional trust have

found.

15 See Appendix 1.2 for the country-level regression models; only model three is included for brevity. 16This study focuses on the quantitative impact of different operationalizations of social trust, but Ikeda (2013) provides a brief discussion of the difference between,” … trust in others one already knows…”, “… trust in a category that one knows is trustful, in general, such as medical doctors…,” and, “… when one judges an unknown other (upon first contact) as trustable…” (pg. 18). While it is largely outside of the scope of this study, these two different operationalizations might tap into these different types of trust, leading to the different outcomes observed.

45

Table 1.6: Trust Index Two Regional-Level OLS Regression

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

t Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.302 0.027 48.915 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.204 0.006 0.329 34.236 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.028 0.007 0.037 3.876 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.2 0.006 0.285 31.224 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.02 0.012 0.015 1.673 0.094

Organizational Membership 0.012 0.01 0.01 1.144 0.252 2 (Constant) 0.842 0.036 23.208 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.186 0.006 0.3 31.317 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.028 0.007 0.038 4.058 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.187 0.006 0.266 29.414 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.046 0.012 0.034 3.87 0 Organizational Membership 0.013 0.01 0.011 1.272 0.203

Traditionalism Index 0.184 0.01 0.165 18.283 0 3 (Constant) 1.041 0.041 25.167 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.165 0.006 0.266 27.38 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.045 0.007 0.061 6.466 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.187 0.006 0.267 29.886 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.062 0.012 0.046 5.248 0

Organizational Membership 0.028 0.01 0.024 2.749 0.006

Traditionalism Index 0.126 0.011 0.113 11.764 0 Female 0.006 0.01 0.005 0.597 0.551

Freedom House Score 0.015 0.002 0.088 8.608 0

Education -0.022 0.002 -0.095 -9.227 0

Income Quintiles -0.004 0.004 -0.008 -0.828 0.408 Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .492a 0.242 0.242 0.4976 2 .517b 0.267 0.267 0.4892 3 .536c 0.287 0.286 0.48272

Moving on to the nine-country subset, I recreate the above analysis with the same

three models, this time using Trust Index 2 rather than Trust Index 1. As such, Trust

Index 2 allows for the analysis to tap into responses to a battery of ten institutions (The

46

executive office, courts, national government, political parties, parliament, the civil

service, the military, the police, the local government, and the election commission).

When compared to the 13-country model, at the regional level there are slight but

important differences in results. Whereas social trust is significant at the .05 level in all

three models at the regional level and organizational membership is significant at this

level in models 1 and 2, utilizing Trust Index 2 these two variables fail to attain

significance at the .05 level in Model 1 (with p-values of .094 and .252, respectively), and

organizational membership again fails to reach significance in Model 2. Interestingly,

both variables are significant in Model 3, whereas organizational membership failed to

reach significance in the 13-country subset. Additionally, Q4 is significant in all three

models, whereas it is only significant in Model Three for the 13-country subset. Because

several countries have been removed from the sample, though, it is difficult to isolate

whether these differences are due to the additional institutions added to the institutional

trust index or the removed cases from the four countries that were dropped. To further

dive into these differences, it is more beneficial to directly compare the country-level

results17.

Unfortunately, when comparing the country-level models for the nine countries

included in both analyses, few clear patterns emerge. Certainly, there are some

differences. Relative to the Trust Index 1 measure, in South Korea familial economic

evaluations are significant in all three models, in Taiwan Q4 is significant in Model 1,

and in Cambodia social trust barely fails to meet the 95% confidence level for

significance, with a p-value of .051. However, these changes are often isolated to singular

17 See Appendix 1.3 for the country-level models.

47

models, and are minimal at best. As such, these results seem to suggest that, on the

margins, the decision of which institutions to include in a measure of institutional trust

does have some ability to impact the interpretation of some of the determinants of

institutional trust, but this decision does not impact each variable equally. The one clear

trend of note is that, for every country in both sets, the R-squared value of the model

utilizing Trust Index 2 as its dependent variable is higher than that of Trust Index 1.

While this does not directly reflect on which operationalization of institutional trust most

accurately captures trust in government, it does at least support the assertion that the

independent variables used in both models more fully predict Trust Index 2’s broader

definition of institutional trust.

At the same time, the results of the analysis of Trust Index 2 do offer further

insight into Hypothesis 1. Namely, the seven-question index for traditional social values

once again remains a consistent determinant of institutional trust, showing a significant

and positive relationship with institutional trust in all three models at the regional level as

well as in each country. Much like in the thirteen-country analysis, this consistency is

akin to that of evaluations of the national economic situation and governmental anti corruption efforts. All together then, these findings provide further support for

Hypothesis 1.

48

INSTITUTIONAL TRUST AND PARTISANSHIP

Data and Methods

Having concluded the above discussion investigating Hypothesis 1 and the impact

of varying operationalizations of social trust, this section of the paper centers around an

investigation into Hypothesis 2, largely inspired by the work of Huang, Lee, and Lin

(2013). As discussed in the literature review, in their paper, Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013)

find that broadly speaking, partisanship, defined as self-identified association with a

political party, exerts a significant influence on institutional trust; those that identify with

an opposition party have a significantly lower level of institutional trust. Moreover,

borrowing a framework from the work of Rothstein and Stolle (2008), Huang, Lee, and

Lin (2013) divide the institutions they investigate into “partisan” and “neutral”

institutions; while there is variance from country to country, the study generally finds that

the impact of partisanship is larger for partisan institutions than neutral institutions.

In this section of the paper, I draw heavily on this approach, with a few key

differences. First, and perhaps most important, I choose to define partisanship in a

slightly different manner. Within the context of this study, I choose to define partisanship

not as self-identified affiliation with a party but instead as whether respondents voted for

the winner or loser of the last major election, as identified by the Asian Barometer

Survey. This operationalization is functionally akin to the measure that taps into what

Park (2017), citing the work of Anderson et. al (2005), terms the “winner-loser thesis,”

predicting that, “… political [institutional] trust should be higher among those who voted

49

for the party in power while lower among those who voted for the opposition,” (pg. 501).

I choose this operationalization method for two major reasons. One, as discussed in the

literature review, there are some notable differences between the findings of Park and

Huang, Lee, and Lin, but due to Park’s limited definition of which institutions matter

when considering institutional trust, it is impossible to isolate whether said differences

are due to different operationalizations of ‘partisanship’ or differences in the battery of

institutions considered. Measuring partisanship in a manner like Park with an expanded

battery of institutions may help clarify this issue. Two, Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) rely

on detailed knowledge of the political situation in the countries they investigate in order

to properly identify and define what, if any, coalitions represent those in power and the

opposition. By contrast, the variable used to identify winners and losers in the Wave 4

ABS data set, Q34a, was created by the in-country survey teams. By utilizing their

definitions of winners and losers, I can rely on their knowledge of the local political

scene.

There are some potential ramifications of this choice to consider. All things

considered, it seems reasonable to expect relatively high levels of consistency between

the two measures – we would expect supporters of a given party to vote for said party,

and opponents to vote against said party. One potential point of concern, however, is

whether or not voters report their voting behavior accurately. For example, several

studies focusing on the United States (e.g. Wright 1990; Wright 1992; Carsey and

Jackson 2001) have found long-running issues with excessively high numbers of voters

reporting that they had voted for the winner in elections. It may be a concern, then, that

the number of winners is overstated and some people who voted for a loser or did not

50

vote may be classified as winners. Based on the predictions of Hypothesis 2 and the party

affiliation partisanship-related findings of Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013), this could

artificially deflate trust levels among winners.

I would, however, push back on this concern to some extent. When analyzing the

mean levels of institutional trust for winners, losers, and non-voters in the eight countries

I include in the regression analysis below, the expected distribution of trust levels is still

evident.

Figure 2.1: Mean Trust Levels by Voter Category

Figure 2.1 displays this point. For all three institution classifications utilized in

this chapter, winners display the highest mean levels of trust, followed by non-voters,

followed by losers. Even if some members of the latter category have misreported their

voting behavior and therefore have been miscategorized, it does not appear to alter the

fundamental relationship that would be expected.

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

General Trust Index Partisan Trust Index Neutral Trust Index

Mean Trust Level

Trust Index

Mean Trust Levels by Voter Category

Non-Voters Winners Losers

51

In addition to this difference, as implied using eight countries from the sample, I

choose to slightly vary the countries included in this analysis. Huang, Lee, and Lin

(2013) choose to investigate six countries included in Wave 3 of the Asian Barometer

Survey: South Korea, Taiwan, Mongolia, The Philippines, Thailand, and Indonesia. By

contrast, I choose to include eight of the countries from Wave 4 of the Asian Barometer

Survey that I used when analyzing Trust Index 2 above: Japan, South Korea, Mongolia,

The Philippines, Taiwan, Cambodia, Malaysia, and Myanmar.

This difference exists for a few reasons. First, Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) choose

to utilize a single definition of partisan and neutral institutions across all the countries

they study, predicated on the assumption that, “… the involvement of national elections,

in which all major parties compete, is the principal criterion for partisan politics,” (pg.

10) Based on this assumption, the authors, “… classify the president/prime minister, the

national government, and parliament as partisan institutions and the courts, civil service,

the military, the police, and the election commission as neutral institutions,” (Huang, Lee,

and Lin 2013, pg. 10). Moreover, they exclude newspapers, television, and NGOs as

neither partisan nor neutral institutions, and political parties and local government

because they are, “… not unique nationally, and respondents of the ABS may have been

referring to different entities,” (Huang, Lee, and Lin 2013, pg. 10). Broadly speaking, I

believe these classifications to be reasonable, and I mirror them in my analysis in this

chapter. Unfortunately, questions about the election commission were not asked in

Indonesia in Wave 4 of the ABS, precluding its inclusion, and a similar lack prevents the

inclusion of China or Singapore.

52

Excluding Indonesia, China, and Singapore, the remaining sample consists of ten

countries. However, there are some peculiarities with the winner and loser data at the

country level that are a potential cause for concern.

Table 2.1: Distribution of Winners, Losers, and Non-Voters

WinnerLoserAggregate Total Total N Valid %

Non-Voter Winner Loser

Japan 199 396 325 920 1081 85.11 Hong Kong 128 85 114 327 1217 26.87 Korea 171 491 295 957 1200 79.75 Mongolia 133 702 338 1173 1228 95.52 Philippines 182 694 184 1060 1200 88.33 Taiwan 260 623 518 1401 1657 84.55 Thailand 88 186 228 502 1200 41.83 Cambodia 257 576 283 1116 1200 93.00 Malaysia 165 506 146 817 1207 67.69 Myanmar 447 392 403 1242 1620 76.67 Total 2030 4651 2834 9515 12810 74.28

Due to the way in which Q34a is coded, only three categories of responses are

provided: voting for the winner, voting for the loser, or a non-applicable category. This

means that it is impossible to establish a baseline of non-voters from Q34a alone; it is

impossible to know whether the non-applicable category refers to a respondent not

voting, voting but refusing to disclose who they voted for, whether the data for the said

voter is missing, and so on. Instead, it is necessary to pull data from both Q34a and Q33.

So, from Q33 I retrieve whether a respondent did not vote in the last election, providing

the non-voter baseline, and then from Q34a I pull information about whether voters voted

for the winning or losing party or candidate in the last election. I use this information to

create the variable WinnerLoserAggregate, responses to which are detailed in Table 2.1,

53

a variable that contains information on respondents who either confirmed they did not

vote or voters who did vote and provided information on who they voted for. From this

variable, I create dummy variables for winners and for losers that will be used in the

regression analysis.

The issue, and what necessitates the inclusion of only eight countries out of the

remaining ten, is that for Hong Kong and Thailand there are notable issues with this data.

As seen in Table 2.1, in Hong Kong only 26.9% of all respondents from the territory can

be classified as a winner, a loser, or a non-voter. In Thailand18, only 41.8% of

respondents can be classified in this way. Comparatively, in every other country, at least

two-thirds of respondents can be classified. For this reason, I choose to exclude both

Hong Kong and Thailand from the analysis, leaving only eight countries.

Moving forward, I conduct the analysis in three parts, following the process

utilized by Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013). In addition to a measure of generalized

institutional trust, TrustIndexGeneral19, an indexed measure of questions 7, 8, 9, 11, 12,

13, 14, and 18 constructed in the same manner as Trust Index 1 and Trust Index 2 above,

I also create a measure of institutional trust in partisan institutions, TrustIndexPartisan,

consisting of only questions 7, 9, and 11, and a measure of institutional trust in neutral

institutions, TrustIndexNeutral, consisting of questions 8, 12, 13, 14, and 18. In each

18 As an additional note, for respondents from Thailand, 1064 respondents stated that they voted in Q33, with 88 saying they did not and 48 either refusing to answer or otherwise not having a coded yes/no answer to the question. But, in Q34 and Q34a, 612 respondents are missing, rather than declining to answer or falling into some similar category. I cannot account for such a massive discrepancy, one that is not present for many other questions in the survey, and this provides further reason to exclude Thailand from the analysis in this section. 19 The institutions included in this measure are: The Executive Office, the National Government, Parliament, the Courts, the Civil Service, the Military, the Police, and the Election Commission. The former three constitute the partisan trust index measure, and the latter five constitute the neutral trust index measure.

54

case, the minimum response is a 1 and the maximum a 4, ranging from the least amount

of institutional trust to the maximum. I treat each of these indexes as their own dependent

variable, and I conduct regression analysis at both the regional level and at the country

level for each one. The independent variables, outside of the addition of the winner and

loser dummy variables, remain the same as in Chapter 1.

Results and Discussion

Before diving into the regression analysis, it is beneficial to have a general grasp

of the relationship between these three measures of institutional trust. Table 2.2 displays

the mean values for each of the three measures along with the standard error of the mean.

From this distribution, it is possible to identify some general trends. First, following the

trends associated with the institutional trust measures in Chapter 1, countries with lower

Freedom House scores, therefore being considered freer, tend to have lower levels of

institutional trust across the board. Second, largely consistent with the findings of Huang,

Lee, and Lin (2013), the mean partisan institutional trust measure is lower than both the

neutral and general measures of institutional trust in every country except Myanmar.

In the case of Myanmar, this unique distribution can be better highlighted by

taking an in-depth look at trust levels in these eight countries for all institutions included

in the general trust index. For the three partisan institutions (the executive office, the

national government, and parliament) the mean scores in Myanmar are approximately .2

to .25 points higher than the regional average. For the five neutral institutions, mean trust

in the courts and the civil service are .1 to .15 points lower, but the major differences lie

with trust in the military, approximately .25 points lower, and the police, more than .5

points on a four-point scale. It is possible these drastically lower levels of trust in two of

55

the five neutral institutions, in combination with above-average trust in partisan

institutions, create this statistical oddity.

Table 2.2: Mean Trust Levels by Institution Type

Moving into the OLS regression analysis, the findings are in many ways

consistent with the findings and predictions of Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) and support

Hypothesis 2. Of note, in the previous chapter, I ran the regression analysis with three

models. But, because this chapter concerns both regional and country-level analysis for

three different dependent variables, I choose to simply run one model for each case. This

model includes all the independent variables including demographic controls, making the

models functionally like Model 3 in the previous chapter outside of the addition of the

winner and loser dummy variables.

Beginning with the general institutional trust model, at the regional level all

variables except for the female dummy variable, income quintiles, and organizational

membership reach significance at the 95% confidence level. It should be noted, however,

that while organizational membership does not strictly meet this definition of

significance, its associated p-value is .059. Much like in Chapter 1, evaluations of the

national economic situation and anti-corruption efforts exert significant, positive

TrustIndexPartisan TrustIndexNeutral TrustIndexGeneral Mean SE Mean SE Mean SE Freedom House Japan 2.17 0.02 2.66 0.02 2.48 0.02 2 Korea 2.1 0.02 2.41 0.02 2.29 0.01 5 Mongolia 2.3 0.02 2.53 0.01 2.44 0.01 4 Philippines 2.46 0.02 2.6 0.02 2.54 0.02 6 Taiwan 2.07 0.01 2.39 0.01 2.27 0.01 3 Cambodia 2.71 0.02 2.77 0.02 2.74 0.02 11 Malaysia 2.93 0.02 2.99 0.02 2.97 0.02 8 Myanmar 2.65 0.02 2.37 0.02 2.47 0.02 11

56

influences in institutional trust, and the standardized coefficients for these two variables

are by far the largest in the model. Social trust, traditional social values, the Freedom

House score, and evaluations of family economic situation all have a significant and

positive relationship with institutional trust, but the standardized coefficients are

comparatively low. Interestingly, these initial results do seem to further support the

predictions of Hypothesis 1; even when controlling for partisanship, higher levels of

traditional social values are correlated with higher levels of institutional trust. Higher

levels of education do result in a significantly lower level of institutional trust, but the

magnitude of this relationship is relatively small. Finally, moving on to the winner and

loser dummy variables, these initial findings provide support for Hypothesis 2. Compared

to non-voters, voting for the winning party in the last election results in a significant and

positive change in general institutional trust at the regional level, and voting for the

losing party results in a significant decrease in institutional trust.

Table 2.3: General Institutional Trust Regional-Level OLS Regression

Model Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

t Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.091 0.049 22.32 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.162 0.007 0.256 23.263 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.041 0.008 0.054 5.193 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.18 0.007 0.249 24.492 0 Social Trust Dummy 0.059 0.014 0.043 4.299 0

Organizational Membership

0.022 0.012 0.019 1.89 0.059

Female 0.008 0.011 0.007 0.743 0.458 Traditionalism Index 0.113 0.013 0.099 9.056 0

Freedom House Score 0.011 0.002 0.058 4.902 0

Education -0.019 0.003 -0.08 -6.96 0

Income Quintiles 0.002 0.005 0.005 0.475 0.635

Winner Dummy 0.12 0.015 0.103 7.904 0

Loser Dummy -0.084 0.017 -0.065 -5.044 0 Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .541a 0.292 0.291 0.49288

57

Moving onto general institutional trust at the country level20, there is a notable

amount of variance in the significance of factors from country to country. Much of this

variance can be attributed to the various demographic controls, but more pertinent to this

discussion is the variance in the significance of the winner and loser dummy variables,

social trust, organizational membership, and traditional social values. Compared to the

regional model, organizational membership is significant and positively associated with

institutional trust in South Korea, Mongolia, and Myanmar. Social trust fails to reach

significance in Mongolia and Cambodia. Considering that these two variables displayed

similar levels of variance in significance in the previous chapter, such trends are not

inherently surprising. However, for the first time, traditional social values fail to reach

significance in a model – in Myanmar, the associated p-value is only .082. Finally, the

winner and loser dummy variables are somewhat erratic. In the case of the former, the

winner dummy variable is not significant in Mongolia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and

Myanmar. In the case of the latter, the loser dummy variable fails to reach significance in

Japan, Mongolia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Myanmar. These findings do not entirely

discredit Hypothesis 2 as one might expect the influence of voting for the winning or

losing party to be diluted in a trust measure that includes both partisan and non-partisan

institutions, but it does at least begin to suggest the impact of such effects is not even

across all countries, much as Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) find in their study, and it raises

the possibility that the loss in trust from voting for a loser is less noticeable than the

increase in trust from voting for the winner.

20 See Appendix 2.1 for the country level regression models.

58

Keeping these findings in mind, I then move onto the analysis of the partisan trust

index. At the regional level, only the female and income quintile variables fail to reach

significance, and there is no variation in the direction of the significant relationships

between the general and partisan models. The magnitude of the impact of the winner and

loser variables is also higher for the partisan trust index than the general trust index,

which suggests that the scale of the impact for voting for the winner or loser may be

larger for partisan institutions. Like the general trust index, there is still noticeable

variation in terms of the significance of determinants between countries21. Organizational

membership fails to reach significance in Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan, Cambodia, and

Malaysia. Social trust fails to reach significance at the 95% confidence level in Mongolia,

the Philippines (with a p-value of .061), Taiwan, and Cambodia. Again, traditional social

values fail to reach significance in one country, but in this case, it is Mongolia, not

Myanmar. While this does not discredit the notion that, in many cases, traditional social

values are an important determinant of institutional trust, the fact that evaluations of

national economic performance and anti-corruption continue to remain significant in

every model highlights their relative consistency compared to other determinants.

21 See Appendix 2.2 for the country level regression models.

59

Table 2.4: Partisan Institutional Trust Regional-Level OLS Regression

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

t Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.547 0.056 9.829 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.196 0.008 0.261 24.702 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.036 0.009 0.04 3.977 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.19 0.008 0.222 22.764 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.058 0.016 0.035 3.707 0

Organizational Membership

0.05 0.013 0.036 3.815 0

Female 0.013 0.013 0.009 1.014 0.311

Traditionalism Index 0.151 0.014 0.111 10.615 0

Freedom House Score 0.043 0.002 0.197 17.374 0

Education -0.017 0.003 -0.062 -5.611 0

Income Quintiles 0.003 0.006 0.005 0.487 0.626

Winner Dummy 0.152 0.017 0.109 8.769 0

Loser Dummy -0.128 0.019 -0.083 -6.739 0 Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .596a 0.355 0.354 0.55818

Finally, the winner dummy variable fails to reach significance in the Philippines

and Myanmar, and the loser dummy variable fails to reach significance in Mongolia,

Taiwan (p-value .054), and Myanmar. Again, the inconsistency of the winner and loser

variables in certain countries further supports the assertion that the impact of partisanship

on institutional trust is, while a factor, one that cannot be generalized to every country.

But both the winner and loser variables reach significance in a larger number of countries

for the partisan institutions, and the direction of the relationship for the countries where

these measures reach significance is in line with expectations, so in many ways, these

findings still provide support for Hypothesis 2.

Finally, I repeat the above process for the neutral trust index. At the regional

level, the results are quite like those of the general trust index, with organizational

60

membership, the female dummy variable, and income quintiles not reaching significance

at the 95% confidence level. While these results are quite similar, an important difference

is that the R Square value for the neutral trust index is notably smaller at .199 than the

general trust index, .292, or the partisan trust index, .355. Similarly, for each country the

R Square value of the neutral trust index is lower than that of the partisan trust index.

This, in combination with the fact that the magnitude of the coefficients for the winner

and loser variables in the neutral trust index are the smallest out of all three regional

models, suggests that the winner and loser variables in particular, and the entirety of the

independent variables tested in general, are less able to explain variance in institutional

trust for these neutral institutions.

Table 2.5: Neutral Institutional Trust Regional-Level OLS Regression

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

t Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.421 0.054 26.258 0 National Economic Evaluations

0.143 0.008 0.217 18.546 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.044 0.009 0.056 5.02 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.172 0.008 0.229 21.153 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.059 0.015 0.041 3.867 0

Organizational Membership

0.007 0.013 0.005 0.511 0.61

Female 0.006 0.013 0.005 0.481 0.631

Traditionalism Index 0.092 0.014 0.078 6.663 0

Freedom House Score -0.009 0.002 -0.047 -3.755 0

Education -0.02 0.003 -0.082 -6.698 0

Income Quintiles 0.003 0.006 0.005 0.454 0.65

Winner Dummy 0.098 0.017 0.081 5.836 0

Loser Dummy -0.063 0.018 -0.047 -3.407 0.001 Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .446a 0.199 0.198 0.54557

61

At the country level22, the neutral institutions again display a somewhat similar

pattern to the one observable in the prior two models, inasmuch as many of the variables

display a wide variance in significance from country to country. Interestingly,

organizational membership fairs better for these institutions, failing to reach significance

only in the Philippines, Cambodia, and Malaysia. Social trust fails to reach significance

in Mongolia, Cambodia (p-value .078), and Myanmar (p-value .078), and once more,

traditional social values fail to reach significance in Myanmar. The variables whose

performance most suffer in this model, however, are the winner and loser variables. The

winner variable fails to reach significance in South Korea, Mongolia, the Philippines,

Taiwan, Cambodia, and Myanmar, and the loser variable fails to reach significance in

Japan, Mongolia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Myanmar23. Evaluations of national

economic performance and governmental anti-corruption efforts are still consistently

significant, positive determinants of institutional trust in every country, and evaluations

of family economic situation pass the 95% confidence interval in all but South Korea and

Myanmar.

What to make of these findings? Before diving into how these findings shape the

understanding of Hypothesis 2, it is necessary to revisit a point made in the literature

review, the way in which the impact of partisanship in Mongolia serves as an example of

potential issues with a limited definition of which institutions matter when creating a

22 See Appendix 2.3 for the country level regression models. 23 Myanmar is very much an oddity in terms of this analysis, with the winner and loser variables failing to reach significance in every single model. While this may, in fact, be accurate, it is important to note that, as detailed by sources like The Economist (2015) that at the time the Wave 4 ABS was being conducted in Myanmar, the country was in a run-up to its first comparatively free and fair general election in decades, coming on the tail-end of five years of military-approved reforms. Further analysis, perhaps when a fifth wave of the ABS survey is released, will likely be necessary to determine whether these findings are a fluke or a pattern.

62

measure of institutional trust. Unfortunately, these results do not provide a

comprehensive conclusion on whether it was Park’s (2017) choice of a limited definition

of institutional trust, only considering parliament and national government, that led to the

divergence in findings between his work and the work of Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013). As

I found, only in the case of partisan institutions does voting for the winner have a

significant, positive impact on institutional trust in Mongolia. But, trust in parliament and

national government makes up two-thirds of this measure, so it is difficult to say with

certainty that it was the institutions chosen rather than changes in the political situation in

Mongolia that explain such variance. What the expanded battery of institutions in

combination with dividing the analysis into partisan and neutral institutions does offer,

however, is the ability to concretely state that, at any given period, partisanship does or

does not significantly impact trust in a wider set of institutions.

More broadly, the collective impression is at least somewhat supportive of

Hypothesis 2. At the regional level, for each model the winner and loser dummy variables

have significant impacts on institutional trust, positive for the case of the winner variable

and negative for the loser variable. This supports the assertion that, as compared to non voters, those who vote for the winner of the most recent election display higher levels of

institutional trust, not only in partisan institutions but also in institutions more broadly,

and losers display lower levels. It is the country-level results that require conditioning the

acceptance of Hypothesis 2 to some extent.

Certainly, the winner and loser dummy variables perform at different levels

depending on whether the model uses a more holistic index of institutional trust or a

partisan/non-partisan measure. That the best performance is found in the partisan model,

63

and the worst the neutral model, suggests that on aggregate the impact of partisanship on

trust in neutral institutions is less than on trust in partisan institutions and is in line with

Hypothesis 2 and the findings of Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013). That these broad

relationships hold when controlling for a wider range of factors than those tested by

Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) provides further support to their argument that partisanship is

an important determinant to test, one that as of yet is underrepresented in the wider

literature on institutional trust. At the same time, the wide variance in country-level

results should serve as something of a cautionary note. It does not seem reasonable to

suggest that partisanship is a sweeping force that influences institutional trust equally in

every location as the regional-level results might initially indicate. Instead, it is likely that

the causal link between partisanship and institutional trust is case-specific, and attempts

to explain such a link will likely necessitate in-depth analysis of time-sensitive situations

in any given location, much as Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) do when attempting to

explain the variance in results they find in their study.

Finally, with the emphasis that this study places on the roles of traditional social

values and partisanship, I re-run the above analysis with a two-level OLS regression

model, the first level including all variables except for traditional social values and the

second model also including traditional social values. If, for example, there were a

number of cases in which the inclusion of traditional social values altered the significance

of the winner or loser variables, it may suggest some form of interaction between these

variables24. However, this does not appear to be the case. For both the partisan and

general trust indexes, the inclusion of traditional social values in no way influences the

24 Because there is no meaningful difference in results, the models are not included in this paper.

64

significance of the winner or loser variables at either the regional-level or the country level. In the case of the neutral trust index, such an effect is only found in South Korea,

although in this case the loser dummy variable actually reaches significance only after

traditional social values is accounted for. For the most part, then, there appears to be no

unique relationship between partisanship and traditional social values.

65

CONCLUSION

Taking a holistic look at the findings of this study, in many ways they serve as

validations of observable trends in the wider literature. At the same time, this study also

provides several conclusions that serve to further advance the discussion on institutional

trust in East and Southeast Asia while providing meaningful avenues of future research.

First, in a broad sense, this project provides further insight into the debate over

whether institutional or cultural factors best explain trends in institutional trust. The

analysis in this paper was prefaced by the claims of authors (e.g. Wong, Wan, and Hsiao

2011; Wang 2013; Park 2017) about the relative superiority or consistency of the

institutional approach to institutional trust. Within that discussion, I asserted, based on

prior literature, that the latter portion of the argument seems a more reasonable claim than

the former, and the results of this study support that assertion. Consistency is, in fact, the

hallmark of the variables reflective of the institutional approach like evaluations of the

national economic situation and governmental anti-corruption efforts. In every single

model included in this paper, these two variables have a significant, positive impact on

institutional trust. Moreover, the standardized coefficients associated with these variables

suggest that the magnitude of their impact is the largest of any tested variable.

The consistency of these two variables, and therefore the comparatively higher

consistency of the institutional approach, is further highlighted by the lack of consistency

displayed by the variables attempting to tap into social capital. For both social trust and

organizational membership, there is a much greater level of variation in significance from

66

model to model and from country to country. This is, admittedly, not surprising given the

inconsistent conclusions the wider literature reaches about these variables, but the fact

that this inconsistently remains apparent when controlling for a wider number of

variables than much of the literature does lend further credence to voices that downplay

the role of social capital in shaping institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia.

Moreover, there appears to be only marginal support for the role that different

operationalizations of social trust play in explaining some of this variance. While

utilizing an alternative operationalization of social trust on the same data set, the general

process modeled off the work of Mujani and Liddle (2013), does alter the significance of

social trust in a subset of the countries studied, it is not a comprehensive explanation. As

such, it seems reasonable to largely accept the literature’s preference for the institutional

approach.

At the same time, there are some findings that prompt pushback on a blanket

assertion that the institutional approach is clearly superior to the cultural approach as

compared to acknowledging that the cultural approach does provide some value. In

particular, the conclusions that we can draw about traditional social values from this

study reflect positively on the cultural approach. Whereas social trust and organizational

membership fail to reach a significant level of certainty in many of the models tested,

traditional social values almost always have a significant, positive impact on institutional

trust. Behind evaluations of the national economic situation and governmental anti corruption efforts, traditional social values are actually the most consistent variable tested

in the entire study. While the wider literature on the topic of traditionalism is much more

mixed, because the results of this study were found using the same operationalization but

67

a newer set of data than Ikeda (2013), it seems reasonable to conclude that much of the

discrepancy in the conclusions drawn about traditional social values are due to issues

with operationalization rather than intrinsic issues that might suggest a lack of a

relationship between traditional social values and institutional trust.

More broadly, these findings offer a mixed picture on the long-term prospects of

institutional trust in the region. Considering their findings on partisanship, Huang, Lee,

and Lin (2013) take a relatively negative tact, arguing that, “… the implications of our

findings seem pessimistic. If institutional trust is subject to partisan projection, there is a

limit to what a democratic government can do to improve trust by improving

governance,” (pg. 67). To some extent, these same fears exist with the findings in this

study. Partisanship does seem to play a role in shaping levels of trust in the region. At the

same time, this relationship does not hold true for each country or each type of

institution, and even in those it does the magnitude of this relationship is smaller than

many other variables. Moreover, the two most consistent and influential determinants of

institutional trust, evaluations of the national economic situation and perceptions of anti corruption efforts, are much more closely associated with governmental performance.

Certainly, there are factors outside the influence of governments that can negatively

impact economic growth, but those concerned about increasing levels of institutional trust

should take heart in the fact that institutional trust does still appear to be tied closely to

good governance. What might be more concerning in the long run is the relationship

between traditional social values and institutional trust. If one assumes that these

traditional values will decay over time, this presents a source of further decline in

68

institutional trust that may be difficult for governments to address. More research is likely

necessary to determine if such a trend exists.

This study also provides additional avenues for further research. First, in line with

the necessity of further research tracking the level of traditional social values in the

region, traditional social values should feature much more prominently in any future

research on institutional trust in East and Southeast Asia. At the same time, this study

utilizes a relatively straightforward operationalization of traditional social values. It

would likely be worthwhile to disaggregate traditional social values further, as Zhai

(2016) does when disaggregating traditional social values in China into family, social,

and political values. There are also several variables discussed in the literature review

that were, unfortunately, not included in this study that warrant further testing. These

include testing to see to what extent the electoral systems utilized influence levels of

institutional trust, the extent to which the proportionality of electoral outcomes influences

institutional trust, and whether a more comprehensive definition of media consumption

would lead to more consistent conclusions about the impact of the variable than currently

exist in the wider literature and address the discrepancies about the variable that exist

between the East Asian and African literature on trust. The more expansive models

utilized in this study are a good first step, but further progress can be made on uniformly

testing competing explanations about the determinants of institutional trust within any

single study.

Additionally, there are some methodological aspects utilized in this project that

either warrant further study or should be more commonly incorporated in the literature on

the topic. The differences in results between partisan and neutral institutions explored in

69

Chapter 2 lend further credence to the assertion made by Huang, Lee, and Lin (2013) that

the relationship between partisanship and institutional trust needs to be accounted for in

more studies. At the same time, it was not only the relationship between partisanship and

institutional trust that varied when looking at partisan versus neutral institutions. This

suggests that, regardless of whether partisanship is being investigated in a study, there is

value in carving out this distinction between types of institutions. Of course, the

differences in the significance of other determinants between partisan and neutral

institutions may not be linked to their partisan or non-partisan nature, but at the very least

this point supports my earlier claim that studies should be taking into account a greater

number of institutions when defining institutional trust; a measure looking at views for

only one or two institutions simply can’t pick up any such potential variation.

Altogether, this study has provided valuable insights on both the institutional and

cultural approaches to institutional trust. It has confirmed the importance of testing both

partisanship and traditional social values as determinants of institutional trust in East and

Southeast Asia. And, more broadly, it has explored some of the implications of the

varying methodologies that have been used in the wider literature while providing some

suggestions on areas where progress can be made on standardizing approaches. Issues of

institutional trust will likely maintain their importance in the years to come, and further

research, both on the regional and at the country level, will be necessary to continue to

improve our understanding of the topic.

70

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anderson, C.J., A. Blais and S. Bowler et al. (2005), Losers’ Consent: Elections and

Democratic Legitimacy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Carsey, T. M., & Jackson, R. A. (2001). Misreport of vote choice in US Senate and

gubernatorial elections. State Politics & Policy Quarterly, 1(2), 196-209. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F153244000100100205

Ceron, A. (2015). Internet, news, and political trust: The difference between social media

and online media outlets. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 20(5), 487-503. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12129

Chang, E. C., & Chu, Y. H. (2006). Corruption and trust: exceptionalism in Asian

democracies?. The Journal of Politics, 68(2), 259-271. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1111/j.1468-2508.2006.00404.x

Chi, E., & Kwon, H. Y. (2016). The trust-eroding effect of perceived inequality:

Evidence from East Asian new democracies. The Social Science Journal, 53(3), 318-328. http://www.socialcapitalgateway.org/sites/socialcapitalgateway.org/files/data/pap er/2017/03/23/rchi2016-thetrust-erodingeffectofperceivedinequality.pdf

Cho, W. (2012). Accountability or representation? How electoral systems promote public

trust in African legislatures. Governance, 25(4), 617-637. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0491.2012.01598.x

Evers, A., & Gesthuizen, M. (2011). The impact of generalized and institutional trust on

donating to activist, leisure, and interest organizations: individual and contextual effects. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 16(4), 381-392. DOI: 10.1002/nvsm.434

Grönlund, K., & Setälä, M. (2007). Political trust, satisfaction and voter turnout.

Comparative European Politics, 5(4), 400-422. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.cep.6110113

Huang, K, Lee, F, & Lin, T. (2013). Partisanship and Institutional Trust: A Comparative

Analysis of Emerging Democracies in East Asia. Taiwan Journal of Democracy, 9(1). 47-71. http://www.academia.edu/15535239/Partisanship_and_Institutional_Trust_A_Co mparative_Analysis_of_Emerging_Democracies_in_East_Asia

Hudson, J. (2006). Institutional trust and subjective well‐being across the EU. Kyklos,

59(1), 43-62. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6435.2006.00319.x

71

Hutchison, M. L. (2011). Territorial threat and the decline of political trust in Africa: A

multilevel analysis. Polity, 43(4), 432-461. https://doi.org/10.1057/pol.2011.3

Hutchison, M. L., & Johnson, K. (2011). Capacity to trust? Institutional capacity,

conflict, and political trust in Africa, 2000–2005. Journal of Peace Research, 48(6), 737-752. DOI: 10.1177/0022343311417981

Ikeda, K. I. (2013). Social and Institutional Trust in East and Southeast Asia. Taiwan

Journal of Democracy, 9(1). http://www.tfd.org.tw/export/sites/tfd/files/publication/journal/dj0901/002.pdf

Kim, J. (2005). “’Bowling Together’ isn’t a Cure-All: The Relationship between Social

Capital and Political Trust in South Korea.” International Political Review, 26(2). 192-213. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0192512105050381

Ma, D., & Yang, F. (2014). Authoritarian orientations and political trust in East Asian

societies. East Asia, 31(4), 323-341. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12140-014-9217-z

Marien, S., & Hooghe, M. (2011). Does political trust matter? An empirical investigation

into the relation between political trust and support for law compliance. European Journal of Political Research, 50(2), 267-291. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14756765.2010.01930.x

Marien, S. (2011). The Effect of Electoral Outcomes on Political Trust. A Multi-level

Analysis of 23 Countries. Electoral Studies, 30(4), 712-726 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2011.06.015

Mishler, W., & Rose, R. (2001). What are the origins of political trust? Testing

institutional and cultural theories in post-communist societies. Comparative political studies, 34(1), 30-62. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0010414001034001002

Mujani, S., & Liddle, R. W. (2013). Generational Change, Political Institutions, and

Regime Support in East Asia. A Comparative Survey of Democracy, Governance, and Development, Working Paper Series, 62. http://asianbarometer.org/publications/0488e16507a69eec1593167650a87ee2.pdf

Park, C. M. (2017). Political trust in the Asia-Pacific region. In S. Zmerli & T. W.G. van

der Meer (Eds.), Handbook on political trust (488-508). Edward Elgar Publishing.

Rothstein, B., & Stolle, D. (2008). The state and social capital: An institutional theory of

generalized trust. Comparative Politics, 40(4), 441-459. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20434095

Shi, T. (2001). Cultural values and political trust: a comparison of the People's Republic

of China and Taiwan. Comparative Politics, 33(4). 401-419. http://www.jstor.org/stable/422441

72

Tan, S.J., & Tambyah, S.K. (2011) Generalized Trust and Trust in Institutions in

Confucian Asia. Social Indicators Research 103, 357–377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-010-9703-7

Tang, M., & Huhe, N. (2016). The variant effect of decentralization on trust in national

and local governments in Asia. Political Studies, 64(1), 216-234. https://doi.org/10.1111%2F1467-9248.12177

Tang, Y. (2011). “Institutional Trust and Democratic Support: A Comparison of the

Peoples of East Asia.” Department of Political Science, National Taiwan University. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/d5e8/6db1f7cbbf579e02a1a3e8898da318d7aa46. pdf?_ga=2.195785516.1091842723.1574007345-1671169823.1574007345

The Economist. (2015, October 29). Change in the Air: An Election in Myanmar.

Retrieved from https://www.economist.com/asia/2015/10/29/change-in-the-air

Wang, C. (2013). Causes and Consequences of Political Trust in East Asia (Dissertation).

University of Houston, Houston, Texas. https://uhir.tdl.org/bitstream/handle/10657/2723/WANG-DISSERTATION2013.pdf?sequence=1

Wong, T. K. Y., Wan, P. S., & Hsiao, H. H. M. (2011). The bases of political trust in six

Asian societies: Institutional and cultural explanations compared. International Political Science Review, 32(3), 263-281. http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0192512110378657

Wright, G. C. (1990). Misreports of vote choice in the 1988 NES senate election study.

Legislative Studies Quarterly, 543-563. https://www.jstor.org/stable/439896

Wright, G. C. (1992). Reported versus actual vote: there is a difference and it matters.

Legislative Studies Quarterly, 131-142. https://www.jstor.org/stable/440085

Wu, Y. (2014). The impact of media on public trust in legal authorities in China and

Taiwan. Asian journal of criminology, 9(2), 85-101. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11417-013-9177-z

Yang, Q. & Tang, W. (2010). Exploring the Sources of Institutional Trust in China:

Culture, Mobilization, or Performance?. Asian Politics & Policy, 2: 415-436. doi:10.1111/j.1943-0787.2010.01201.x

Zhai, Y. (2016). Traditional Values and Political Trust in China. Journal of Asian and

African Studies, 53(3). 350-365. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0021909616684860

73

APPENDIX

Appendix 1.1: Trust Index 1 Country-Level Regression Models

JAPAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.084 0.142

National Economic Evaluations 0.095*** 0.019 0.169

Family Economic Evaluations 0.103*** 0.022 0.166

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.175*** 0.021 0.278

Social Trust Dummy 0.089** 0.033 0.088

Organizational Membership 0.061 0.035 0.057

Traditionalism Index 0.14*** 0.038 0.123

Female -0.086** 0.031 -0.091

Education 0.01 0.01 0.036

Income Quintiles -0.009 0.012 -0.028 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .485c 0.235 0.226 0.41749

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

HONG KONG

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 0.93 0.132

National Economic Evaluations 0.166*** 0.019 0.279

Family Economic Evaluations 0.007 0.024 0.009 Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.116*** 0.022 0.177

Social Trust Dummy 0.086** 0.029 0.092

Organizational Membership 0.146** 0.046 0.101

Traditionalism Index 0.342*** 0.037 0.308

Female -0.009 0.029 -0.01

Education -0.007 0.006 -0.035 Income Quintiles -0.016 0.01 -0.052 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .547c 0.3 0.291 0.39238 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

KOREA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.154 0.13

National Economic Evaluations 0.103*** 0.02 0.155

Family Economic Evaluations 0.041 0.023 0.054

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.128*** 0.021 0.174

Social Trust Dummy 0.132*** 0.03 0.127

Organizational Membership 0.108*** 0.029 0.108

74

Traditionalism Index 0.147*** 0.03 0.142

Female 0.005 0.028 0.005

Education -0.009 0.009 -0.028

Income Quintiles 0.007 0.012 0.017 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .393c 0.155 0.148 0.45985

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

CHINA

Model Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.69 0.112

National Economic Evaluations 0.095*** 0.01 0.216

Family Economic Evaluations 0.005 0.014 0.009

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.125*** 0.016 0.171

Social Trust Dummy 0.107*** 0.019 0.12

Organizational Membership 0.017 0.073 0.005

Traditionalism Index 0.258*** 0.032 0.181

Female -0.038* 0.019 -0.043

Education -0.009* 0.004 -0.054

Income Quintiles -0.018* 0.008 -0.056 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .433c 0.188 0.184 0.40057

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MONGOLIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.408 0.14

National Economic Evaluations 0.128*** 0.02 0.197 Family Economic Evaluations 0.053* 0.022 0.073

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.084*** 0.019 0.133

Social Trust Dummy 0.022 0.037 0.018

Organizational Membership 0.105** 0.032 0.099

Traditionalism Index 0.104** 0.033 0.095 Female -0.008 0.03 -0.008

Education -0.002 0.007 -0.009

Income Quintiles 0.002 0.016 0.004 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .310c 0.096 0.088 0.48385

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

PHILIPPINES

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.283 0.143

National Economic Evaluations 0.139*** 0.018 0.221

Family Economic Evaluations 0.042* 0.02 0.061

75

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.105*** 0.019 0.152

Social Trust Dummy 0.162** 0.057 0.078

Organizational Membership 0.043 0.032 0.037

Traditionalism Index 0.181*** 0.036 0.136 Female -0.004 0.031 -0.004

Education -0.023** 0.007 -0.093

Income Quintiles -0.051** 0.016 -0.097 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .396c 0.157 0.15 0.52298

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

TAIWAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.074 0.123

National Economic Evaluations 0.135*** 0.013 0.26

Family Economic Evaluations 0.052** 0.016 0.086

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.156*** 0.016 0.241

Social Trust Dummy 0.063* 0.026 0.063

Organizational Membership 0.065** 0.024 0.065

Traditionalism Index 0.129*** 0.037 0.091

Female -0.001 0.024 -0.001

Education -0.005 0.006 -0.022

Income Quintiles -0.032** 0.011 -0.08 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .469c 0.22 0.215 0.44443 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

THAILAND

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.586 0.174

National Economic Evaluations 0.096*** 0.023 0.164

Family Economic Evaluations 0.005 0.032 0.007

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.085*** 0.024 0.127

Social Trust Dummy 0.15*** 0.04 0.136

Organizational Membership 0.146*** 0.039 0.133

Traditionalism Index 0.222*** 0.043 0.181

Female -0.06 0.037 -0.056

Education -0.027** 0.008 -0.117

Income Quintiles 0.002 0.019 0.005 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .423c 0.179 0.168 0.48238 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

INDONESIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.29 0.15

National Economic Evaluations 0.125*** 0.018 0.204

76

Family Economic Evaluations 0.039 0.02 0.058

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.14*** 0.023 0.172

Social Trust Dummy 0.139*** 0.034 0.112

Organizational Membership 0.089 0.055 0.045 Traditionalism Index 0.144*** 0.035 0.114

Female 0.028 0.028 0.028

Education -0.03*** 0.007 -0.136

Income Quintiles 0.06*** 0.012 0.157 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .449c 0.201 0.195 0.45663

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

SINGAPORE

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.171 0.201

National Economic Evaluations

0.103** 0.03 0.145

Family Economic Evaluations

0.057 0.031 0.08

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.199*** 0.033 0.238

Social Trust Dummy 0.154** 0.048 0.125

Organizational Membership -0.077 0.042 -0.07 Traditionalism Index 0.172*** 0.04 0.175

Female 0.024 0.041 0.023

Education 0.005 0.01 0.022

Income Quintiles 0.025 0.019 0.054 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .434c 0.188 0.175 0.48336

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

CAMBODIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 0.753 0.144

National Economic Evaluations

0.212 *** 0.02 0.286

Family Economic Evaluations

0.053 * 0.023 0.06

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.221 *** 0.02 0.292

Social Trust Dummy 0.035 0.043 0.02

Organizational Membership -0.022 0.039 -0.014 Traditionalism Index 0.219 *** 0.036 0.152

Female 0.129 *** 0.03 0.109

Education -0.019** 0.007 -0.076

Income Quintiles -0.032* 0.014 -0.06 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .549c 0.301 0.296 0.49492

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

77

MALAYSIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.026 0.124 National Economic Evaluations

0.188 *** 0.018 0.288

Family Economic Evaluations

0.09 *** 0.021 0.114

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.192 *** 0.019 0.258

Social Trust Dummy 0.149 ** 0.051 0.07

Organizational Membership 0.025 0.032 0.018

Traditionalism Index 0.241 *** 0.031 0.192

Female -0.025 0.029 -0.021

Education -0.023** 0.007 -0.083

Income Quintiles -0.05*** 0.013 -0.101 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .611c 0.373 0.368 0.47187

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MYANMAR

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 0.705 0.165

National Economic Evaluations

0.115 *** 0.025 0.13

Family Economic Evaluations

0.037 0.03 0.035

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.319*** 0.021 0.404

Social Trust Dummy 0.177*** 0.046 0.099

Organizational Membership 0.155*** 0.037 0.108

Traditionalism Index 0.121** 0.038 0.083

Female 0.011 0.035 0.008

Education -0.027*** 0.007 -0.098

Income Quintiles -0.017 0.021 -0.022 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .532c 0.283 0.277 0.57966

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

Appendix 1.2: 13-Trust Index 1 Country-Level Regression with Social Trust Index

JAPAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

3 (Constant) 1.027 0.139

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.09 0.019 0.161 0 Family Economic Evaluations 0.099 0.022 0.158 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.162 0.021 0.258 0

Organizational Membership 0.044 0.034 0.041 0.199

Social Trust Index 0.073 0.015 0.165 0

Traditionalism Index 0.133 0.037 0.116 0

Female -0.085 0.031 -0.09 0.005

Education 0.008 0.01 0.029 0.411

Income Quintiles -0.013 0.012 -0.039 0.282 Model Summary

78

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .503c 0.253 0.244 0.41166

HONG KONG

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 0.91 0.131

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.157 0.019 0.263 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.016 0.024 0.021 0.505

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.099 0.022 0.151 0

Organizational Membership 0.146 0.045 0.101 0.001

Social Trust Index 0.045 0.013 0.112 0.001

Traditionalism Index 0.339 0.037 0.304 0

Female -0.011 0.029 -0.012 0.694

Education -0.007 0.006 -0.035 0.269

Income Quintiles -0.018 0.01 -0.057 0.068 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .549c 0.302 0.294 0.39242

KOREA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.196 0.127

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.102 0.019 0.154 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.029 0.022 0.038 0.194 Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.12 0.021 0.163 0

Organizational Membership 0.099 0.028 0.099 0

Social Trust Index 0.072 0.011 0.181 0

Traditionalism Index 0.133 0.029 0.128 0

Female -0.005 0.028 -0.005 0.845

Education -0.018 0.009 -0.062 0.045

Income Quintiles 0.012 0.012 0.03 0.333 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .412c 0.17 0.163 0.45641

CHINA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.583 0.11

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.093 0.01 0.209 0

Family Economic Evaluations -0.004 0.013 -0.006 0.785

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.119 0.016 0.16 0

Organizational Membership 0.016 0.071 0.005 0.818

Social Trust Index 0.065 0.009 0.155 0

Traditionalism Index 0.267 0.031 0.187 0

Female -0.031 0.019 -0.035 0.1

79

Education -0.01 0.004 -0.062 0.01

Income Quintiles -0.016 0.008 -0.051 0.031 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .439c 0.193 0.189 0.40288

MONGOLIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.311 0.14 0

National Economic Evaluations 0.12 0.019 0.184 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.056 0.022 0.078 0.01

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.079 0.018 0.125 0

Organizational Membership 0.087 0.031 0.083 0.005

Social Trust Index 0.057 0.014 0.116 0

Traditionalism Index 0.091 0.032 0.083 0.005

Female -0.003 0.029 -0.002 0.932

Education -0.002 0.007 -0.011 0.743

Income Quintiles 0.013 0.016 0.026 0.42 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .325c 0.106 0.098 0.4804

THE PHILIPPINES

Model Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.237 0.139

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.13 0.018 0.208 0 Family Economic Evaluations 0.034 0.019 0.05 0.072

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.089 0.018 0.13 0

Organizational Membership 0.035 0.031 0.03 0.259 Social Trust Index 0.112 0.014 0.22 0

Traditionalism Index 0.156 0.036 0.118 0

Female 0.013 0.03 0.011 0.672 Education -0.021 0.007 -0.085 0.003

Income Quintiles -0.05 0.015 -0.094 0.001 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .444c 0.197 0.191 0.51021

TAIWAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.021 0.119

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.13 0.013 0.253 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.045 0.016 0.074 0.005

80

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.15 0.016 0.233 0

Organizational Membership 0.054 0.024 0.053 0.024

Social Trust Index 0.07 0.01 0.175 0

Traditionalism Index 0.118 0.036 0.084 0.001 Female -0.001 0.023 -0.001 0.951

Education -0.007 0.006 -0.033 0.249

Income Quintiles -0.037 0.011 -0.092 0.001 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .496c 0.246 0.241 0.43645

THAILAND

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.426 0.161

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.087 0.022 0.15 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.013 0.029 0.016 0.659

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.07 0.022 0.105 0.002

Organizational Membership 0.109 0.037 0.1 0.003

Social Trust Index 0.121 0.016 0.27 0

Traditionalism Index 0.21 0.041 0.173 0

Female -0.047 0.035 -0.045 0.173

Education -0.021 0.008 -0.092 0.008

Income Quintiles -0.003 0.018 -0.006 0.858 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .487c 0.237 0.228 0.46616

INDONESIA Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.192 0.15

0 National Economic Evaluations 0.119 0.018 0.195 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.034 0.02 0.05 0.092

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.138 0.022 0.172 0 Organizational Membership 0.097 0.054 0.049 0.073

Social Trust Index 0.068 0.014 0.137 0

Traditionalism Index 0.137 0.035 0.109 0 Female 0.04 0.028 0.04 0.145

Education -0.03 0.007 -0.137 0

Income Quintiles 0.058 0.012 0.155 0 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .454c 0.206 0.199 0.45369

SINGAPORE

81

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 1.093 0.199

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.11 0.03 0.153 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.041 0.03 0.058 0.177

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.2 0.032 0.239 0

Organizational Membership -0.056 0.042 -0.051 0.179

Social Trust Index 0.053 0.016 0.125 0.001

Traditionalism Index 0.184 0.04 0.185 0

Female 0.028 0.041 0.027 0.487

Education 0.002 0.01 0.009 0.822

Income Quintiles 0.031 0.019 0.067 0.105 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .438c 0.192 0.179 0.48426

CAMBODIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 0.695 0.142

0 National Economic Evaluations 0.211 0.019 0.284 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.037 0.023 0.043 0.102

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.213 0.019 0.282 0

Organizational Membership -0.005 0.038 -0.003 0.888 Social Trust Index 0.088 0.015 0.146 0

Traditionalism Index 0.2 0.036 0.139 0

Female 0.145 0.03 0.123 0

Education -0.021 0.007 -0.084 0.002

Income Quintiles -0.028 0.014 -0.051 0.048 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .567c 0.321 0.316 0.48783

MALAYSIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 0.993 0.124

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.189 0.018 0.289 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.083 0.021 0.105 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.189 0.019 0.255 0

Organizational Membership 0.023 0.032 0.017 0.479

Social Trust Index 0.062 0.014 0.109 0

Traditionalism Index 0.224 0.031 0.179 0

Female -0.01 0.029 -0.008 0.734

Education -0.025 0.007 -0.091 0.001

Income Quintiles -0.049 0.013 -0.1 0 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

82

3 .615c 0.378 0.373 0.46946

MYANMAR

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients

Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

3 (Constant) 0.71 0.16

0

National Economic Evaluations 0.111 0.024 0.125 0

Family Economic Evaluations 0.023 0.029 0.021 0.435

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.304 0.02 0.385 0

Organizational Membership 0.144 0.036 0.1 0

Social Trust Index 0.103 0.012 0.21 0

Traditionalism Index 0.097 0.037 0.067 0.009

Female 0.019 0.034 0.014 0.578

Education -0.029 0.007 -0.104 0 Income Quintiles -0.012 0.021 -0.016 0.55 Model Summary

Model R R Square

Adjusted R Square

Std. Error of the Estimate

3 .562c 0.316 0.31 0.56618

Appendix 1.3: Trust Index 2 Country-Level Regression Models

JAPAN Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.075 0.131

National Economic Evaluations

0.102*** 0.018 0.19

Family Economic Evaluations

0.093*** 0.02 0.158

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.174*** 0.019 0.292

Social Trust Dummy 0.078* 0.031 0.081 Organizational Membership

0.063 0.032 0.061

Traditionalism Index 0.163*** 0.035 0.151

Female -0.093** 0.029 -0.104

Education 0.002 0.009 0.006

Income Quintiles -0.01 0.011 -0.032 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .514c 0.264 0.255 0.38745

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

KOREA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.165 0.122

National Economic Evaluations

0.099*** 0.018 0.157

Family Economic Evaluations

0.047* 0.021 0.066

83

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.123*** 0.02 0.175

Social Trust Dummy 0.149*** 0.028 0.151

Organizational Membership

0.106*** 0.027 0.111

Traditionalism Index 0.157*** 0.028 0.158

Female 0.01 0.026 0.011

Education -0.015 0.009 -0.052

Income Quintiles 0.008 0.012 0.021 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .425c 0.181 0.174 0.43078

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MONGOLIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.351 0.128

National Economic Evaluations

0.153*** 0.018 0.253

Family Economic Evaluations

0.059** 0.02 0.087

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.078*** 0.017 0.133

Social Trust Dummy 0.008 0.033 0.007

Organizational Membership 0.102*** 0.029 0.103

Traditionalism Index 0.092** 0.03 0.09

Female -0.009 0.027 -0.01

Education -0.002 0.006 -0.009

Income Quintiles -0.011 0.015 -0.025 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .358c 0.128 0.121 0.44168

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

PHILIPPINES

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.264 0.131

National Economic Evaluations

0.154 *** 0.017 0.262

Family Economic Evaluations

0.036* 0.018 0.056

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.108*** 0.017 0.169

Social Trust Dummy 0.191*** 0.052 0.099

Organizational Membership 0.04 0.029 0.037 Traditionalism Index 0.173*** 0.033 0.14

Female 0.017 0.028 0.016

Education -0.019** 0.007 -0.082

Income Quintiles -0.059*** 0.014 -0.12 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .443c 0.197 0.19 0.47705

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

84

TAIWAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.002 0.109

National Economic Evaluations

0.13*** 0.012 0.272

Family Economic Evaluations

0.059*** 0.014 0.107

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.158*** 0.014 0.265

Social Trust Dummy 0.069** 0.023 0.075

Organizational Membership

0.065** 0.022 0.07

Traditionalism Index 0.155*** 0.033 0.119

Female -0.012 0.021 -0.013

Education -0.008 0.006 -0.04

Income Quintiles -0.036*** 0.01 -0.098 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .519c 0.269 0.265 0.39708

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

THAILAND

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 1.593 0.164

National Economic Evaluations

0.108*** 0.022 0.193

Family Economic Evaluations

0.006 0.03 0.007

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.079*** 0.022 0.125

Social Trust Dummy 0.105** 0.038 0.1

Organizational Membership 0.153*** 0.037 0.147 Traditionalism Index 0.21*** 0.041 0.18

Female -0.055 0.034 -0.054

Education -0.03*** 0.008 -0.139

Income Quintiles -0.005 0.018 -0.011 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .437c 0.191 0.181 0.45454

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

CAMBODIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 0.857 0.133

National Economic Evaluations

0.205*** 0.018 0.297

Family Economic Evaluations

0.046* 0.021 0.057

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.215*** 0.018 0.305

Social Trust Dummy 0.047 0.04 0.029

Organizational Membership -0.004 0.036 -0.002

Traditionalism Index 0.207*** 0.034 0.154

Female 0.112*** 0.028 0.101

85

Education -0.016* 0.006 -0.068

Income Quintiles -0.028* 0.013 -0.055 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .562c 0.316 0.31 0.45694

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MALAYSIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 0.99 0.118

National Economic Evaluations

0.191*** 0.017 0.302

Family Economic Evaluations

0.078*** 0.02 0.102

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.192*** 0.018 0.266

Social Trust Dummy 0.164** 0.049 0.079

Organizational Membership 0.044 0.031 0.034 Traditionalism Index 0.237*** 0.029 0.195

Female -0.002 0.027 -0.001

Education -0.023** 0.007 -0.087

Income Quintiles -0.049*** 0.013 -0.102 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .628c 0.394 0.389 0.4507

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MYANMAR

Model Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 3 (Constant) 0.798 0.156

National Economic Evaluations

0.101*** 0.023 0.119

Family Economic Evaluations

0.042 0.028 0.041

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.307*** 0.02 0.408

Social Trust Dummy 0.163*** 0.043 0.096

Organizational Membership 0.137*** 0.035 0.099 Traditionalism Index 0.14*** 0.036 0.1

Female 0.012 0.033 0.009

Education -0.028*** 0.007 -0.107

Income Quintiles -0.012 0.02 -0.016 Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 3 .539c 0.291 0.285 0.5501

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

Appendix 2.1: General Institutional Trust Country-Level Regression Models

JAPAN

Model Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 1.081 0.142

National Economic Evaluations

0.092*** 0.019 0.166

86

Family Economic Evaluations

0.084*** 0.021 0.137

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.167*** 0.021 0.27

Social Trust Dummy 0.098** 0.032 0.098

Organizational Membership

0.052 0.035 0.048

Female -0.101** 0.031 -0.107

Traditionalism Index 0.146*** 0.038 0.129

Education 0.01 0.01 0.036 Income Quintiles 0.002 0.012 0.007

Winner Dummy 0.14** 0.042 0.149

Loser Dummy -0.052 0.043 -0.054 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .558a 0.311 0.3 0.39229

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

KOREA

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Model

B Std. Error Beta

(Constant) 1.029 0.135

1 National Economic Evaluations

0.084*** 0.02 0.132

Family Economic Evaluations

0.04 0.023 0.054

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.124*** 0.023 0.169

Social Trust Dummy 0.142*** 0.031 0.14

Organizational Membership

0.119*** 0.03 0.121

Female 0.022 0.029 0.023

Traditionalism Index 0.194*** 0.031 0.191

Education 0.007 0.01 0.026 Income Quintiles -0.007 0.013 -0.019

Winner Dummy 0.101* 0.041 0.103

Loser Dummy -0.134** 0.043 -0.126 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .488a 0.239 0.229 0.43085 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MONGOLIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 1.434 0.14

National Economic Evaluations

0.14*** 0.019 0.229

Family Economic Evaluations

0.067** 0.021 0.098

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.063** 0.018 0.105

Social Trust Dummy 0.004 0.035 0.004

Organizational Membership 0.102** 0.03 0.102

87

Female -0.011 0.028 -0.012

Traditionalism Index 0.088** 0.031 0.085

Education 0.003 0.006 0.013

Income Quintiles -0.015 0.015 -0.034

Winner Dummy 0.043 0.047 0.045

Loser Dummy -0.037 0.051 -0.036 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .344a 0.118 0.109 0.44979 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

PHILIPPINES Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 1.201 0.153

National Economic Evaluations

0.14*** 0.018 0.234

Family Economic Evaluations

0.049* 0.02 0.073

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.102*** 0.019 0.154

Social Trust Dummy 0.166** 0.056 0.084

Organizational Membership 0.051 0.033 0.046

Female 0.018 0.031 0.017

Traditionalism Index 0.19*** 0.037 0.146

Education -0.023** 0.007 -0.096

Income Quintiles -0.045** 0.016 -0.089

Winner Dummy 0.05 0.043 0.044

Loser Dummy -0.08 0.053 -0.055 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .432a 0.187 0.178 0.4936 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

TAIWAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 0.868 0.125

National Economic Evaluations

0.134 *** 0.013 0.268

Family Economic Evaluations

0.06*** 0.016 0.102

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.156*** 0.016 0.247 Social Trust Dummy 0.079** 0.025 0.081

Organizational Membership

0.089*** 0.024 0.09

Female -0.018 0.024 -0.018

Traditionalism Index 0.183*** 0.037 0.13

Education -0.002 0.006 -0.011

Income Quintiles -0.035** 0.011 -0.09

Winner Dummy 0.056 0.034 0.057

Loser Dummy -0.034 0.034 -0.033 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .544a 0.296 0.289 0.41191

88

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

CAMBODIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 0.965 0.142

National Economic Evaluations

0.196*** 0.019 0.267

Family Economic Evaluations

0.045* 0.022 0.054

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.2*** 0.019 0.27

Social Trust Dummy 0.06 0.042 0.035

Organizational Membership -0.026 0.038 -0.017 Female 0.099** 0.029 0.085

Traditionalism Index 0.204*** 0.035 0.145

Education -0.009 0.007 -0.035

Income Quintiles -0.047** 0.014 -0.087

Winner Dummy 0.078* 0.036 0.067

Loser Dummy -0.24*** 0.041 -0.181 Model Summary Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .617a 0.381 0.374 0.46064

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MALAYSIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 1.135 0.147

National Economic Evaluations

0.167*** 0.021 0.25

Family Economic Evaluations

0.09*** 0.024 0.109

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.195*** 0.023 0.258

Social Trust Dummy 0.174** 0.059 0.078

Organizational Membership 0.011 0.036 0.008

Female -0.059 0.033 -0.049

Traditionalism Index 0.194*** 0.035 0.153 Education -0.022** 0.008 -0.082

Income Quintiles -0.037* 0.015 -0.075

Winner Dummy 0.172*** 0.042 0.138

Loser Dummy -0.187** 0.054 -0.119 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .687a 0.472 0.464 0.44227

*** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

MYANMAR

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients

B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 0.988 0.18

National Economic Evaluations

0.132*** 0.027 0.157

89

Family Economic Evaluations

0.042 0.032 0.041

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.275*** 0.023 0.366

Social Trust Dummy 0.112* 0.05 0.065

Organizational Membership 0.156*** 0.04 0.112

Female 0.04 0.038 0.03

Traditionalism Index 0.072 0.041 0.052

Education -0.029*** 0.008 -0.109

Income Quintiles -0.031 0.023 -0.04

Winner Dummy 0.081 0.047 0.058

Loser Dummy -0.029 0.046 -0.021 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .520a 0.271 0.262 0.56092 *** p <.001, ** p <. 01, * p < .05

Appendix 2.2: Partisan Institutional Trust Country-Level Regression Models

JAPAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.722 0.172 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.127 0.023 0.188 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.1 0.026 0.134 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.181 0.025 0.241 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.091 0.039 0.075 0.021

Organizational Membership

0.023 0.042 0.017 0.59

Female -0.138 0.037 -0.12 0

Traditionalism Index 0.182 0.046 0.132 0

Education -0.002 0.012 -0.006 0.877

Income Quintiles -0.025 0.015 -0.063 0.088

Winner Dummy 0.185 0.051 0.16 0

Loser Dummy -0.126 0.052 -0.106 0.015

Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate

1 .568a 0.322 0.311 0.47544

KOREA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.812 0.159 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.114 0.024 0.149 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.032 0.028 0.036 0.244

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.157 0.027 0.178 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.166 0.037 0.136 0

90

Organizational Membership

0.1 0.035 0.084 0.005

Female 0.019 0.035 0.016 0.579

Traditionalism Index 0.195 0.036 0.161 0

Education -0.016 0.012 -0.046 0.175

Income Quintiles 0.009 0.015 0.019 0.556

Winner Dummy 0.156 0.049 0.133 0.001

Loser Dummy -0.192 0.051 -0.15 0

Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate

1 .514a 0.265 0.256 0.50725

MONGOLIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.031 0.182 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.189 0.024 0.235 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.081 0.027 0.091 0.003

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.094 0.023 0.12 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.037 0.045 0.024 0.419

Organizational Membership

0.158 0.039 0.12 0

Female 0.015 0.037 0.012 0.69

Traditionalism Index 0.045 0.04 0.033 0.269

Education -0.001 0.008 -0.003 0.922

Income Quintiles -0.015 0.02 -0.026 0.434

Winner Dummy 0.223 0.061 0.174 0

Loser Dummy 0.027 0.066 0.02 0.682

Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate

1 .386a 0.149 0.14 0.5817

PHILIPPINES

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.991 0.173 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.184 0.021 0.272 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.032 0.022 0.042 0.155

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.113 0.021 0.151 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.12 0.064 0.054 0.061

Organizational Membership

0.054 0.037 0.043 0.143

Female 0.021 0.035 0.018 0.544

91

Traditionalism Index 0.184 0.042 0.125 0

Education -0.018 0.008 -0.067 0.032

Income Quintiles -0.036 0.018 -0.062 0.047

Winner Dummy 0.042 0.048 0.033 0.381

Loser Dummy -0.156 0.06 -0.096 0.01

Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate

1 .430a 0.185 0.176 0.55658

TAIWAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.684 0.145 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.161 0.015 0.283 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.048 0.019 0.072 0.01

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.158 0.019 0.219 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.048 0.029 0.043 0.106

Organizational Membership

0.052 0.028 0.046 0.065

Female -0.008 0.028 -0.007 0.772

Traditionalism Index 0.186 0.043 0.116 0

Education -0.009 0.007 -0.035 0.237

Income Quintiles -0.029 0.013 -0.066 0.023

Winner Dummy 0.095 0.039 0.085 0.015

Loser Dummy -0.076 0.039 -0.066 0.054

Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate

1 .527a 0.278 0.271 0.4757

CAMBODIA

Model Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.813 0.172 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.248 0.023 0.286 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.032 0.027 0.032 0.226

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.215 0.023 0.246 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.027 0.05 0.013 0.588

Organizational Membership

0.02 0.046 0.011 0.658

Female 0.096 0.036 0.07 0.007

Traditionalism Index 0.177 0.042 0.106 0

Education -0.005 0.008 -0.016 0.567

Income Quintiles -0.042 0.017 -0.066 0.014

92

Winner Dummy 0.114 0.044 0.083 0.01

Loser Dummy -0.27 0.05 -0.172 0

Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate

1 .589a 0.347 0.34 0.55713

MALAYSIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig. B Std. Error Beta 1 (Constant) 0.797 0.177 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.224 0.025 0.284 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.082 0.029 0.084 0.004

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.191 0.027 0.215 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.233 0.072 0.088 0.001 Organizational Membership

0.032 0.043 0.02 0.467

Female -0.041 0.039 -0.029 0.3

Traditionalism Index 0.209 0.042 0.14 0

Education -0.016 0.01 -0.051 0.097 Income Quintiles -0.036 0.018 -0.062 0.045

Winner Dummy 0.262 0.051 0.178 0

Loser Dummy -0.192 0.065 -0.103 0.003 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .669a 0.448 0.44 0.53376

MYANMAR Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.885 0.198 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.144 0.029 0.161 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.038 0.035 0.036 0.269

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.267 0.025 0.338 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.121 0.055 0.066 0.028

Organizational Membership

0.157 0.044 0.106 0

Female 0.039 0.042 0.028 0.344 Traditionalism Index 0.137 0.045 0.093 0.003

Education -0.024 0.009 -0.085 0.008

Income Quintiles -0.008 0.025 -0.01 0.742

Winner Dummy 0.065 0.052 0.044 0.209

Loser Dummy -0.055 0.05 -0.037 0.277 Model Summary Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .502a 0.252 0.242 0.60207

93

Appendix 2.3: Neutral Institutional Trust Country-Level Regression Models

JAPAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.301 0.159 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.076 0.021 0.13 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.075 0.024 0.117 0.002

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.157 0.023 0.241 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.099 0.036 0.094 0.007

Organizational Membership

0.082 0.039 0.072 0.037

Female -0.074 0.035 -0.074 0.034

Traditionalism Index 0.126 0.042 0.105 0.003 Education 0.016 0.011 0.055 0.151

Income Quintiles 0.016 0.014 0.045 0.249

Winner Dummy 0.096 0.047 0.097 0.043

Loser Dummy -0.017 0.048 -0.017 0.722 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .463a 0.215 0.202 0.44057

KOREA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.155 0.151 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.067 0.023 0.098 0.003

Family Economic Evaluations

0.044 0.026 0.056 0.095

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.104 0.025 0.133 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.129 0.035 0.119 0

Organizational Membership

0.131 0.034 0.125 0

Female 0.026 0.033 0.025 0.43 Traditionalism Index 0.192 0.034 0.178 0

Education 0.022 0.011 0.071 0.047

Income Quintiles -0.017 0.014 -0.042 0.234

Winner Dummy 0.071 0.046 0.068 0.126 Loser Dummy -0.098 0.049 -0.086 0.044 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .401a 0.16 0.15 0.48116

MONGOLIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.681 0.153 0

94

National Economic Evaluations

0.11 0.02 0.171 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.057 0.023 0.079 0.013

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.043 0.02 0.068 0.029

Social Trust Dummy -0.018 0.038 -0.015 0.635

Organizational Membership

0.07 0.033 0.066 0.033

Female -0.028 0.031 -0.028 0.359 Traditionalism Index 0.119 0.034 0.108 0.001

Education 0.003 0.007 0.015 0.66

Income Quintiles -0.013 0.017 -0.028 0.416

Winner Dummy -0.068 0.052 -0.066 0.19 Loser Dummy -0.081 0.055 -0.073 0.144 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .262a 0.068 0.058 0.489

PHILIPPINES

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.319 0.173 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.116 0.021 0.177 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.059 0.022 0.081 0.008

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.094 0.021 0.128 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.196 0.064 0.091 0.002

Organizational Membership

0.05 0.037 0.041 0.172

Female 0.016 0.035 0.013 0.66

Traditionalism Index 0.196 0.042 0.137 0

Education -0.026 0.008 -0.1 0.002

Income Quintiles -0.049 0.018 -0.088 0.006

Winner Dummy 0.057 0.048 0.045 0.236

Loser Dummy -0.034 0.06 -0.022 0.571 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .374a 0.14 0.131 0.55615

TAIWAN

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 0.984 0.14 0 National Economic Evaluations

0.112 0.015 0.211 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.066 0.018 0.106 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.155 0.018 0.23 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.1 0.028 0.095 0

Organizational Membership

0.108 0.027 0.102 0

Female -0.027 0.027 -0.025 0.319

95

Traditionalism Index 0.183 0.042 0.122 0

Education 0.002 0.007 0.007 0.82

Income Quintiles -0.038 0.012 -0.093 0.002

Winner Dummy 0.044 0.037 0.041 0.245

Loser Dummy 0.001 0.038 0.001 0.988 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .481a 0.231 0.224 0.46051

CAMBODIA

Model Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.041 0.152 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.17 0.021 0.227 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.055 0.023 0.064 0.018

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.189 0.021 0.249 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.078 0.044 0.045 0.078

Organizational Membership

-0.053 0.04 -0.034 0.191

Female 0.102 0.032 0.086 0.001

Traditionalism Index 0.217 0.037 0.151 0

Education -0.01 0.007 -0.038 0.175

Income Quintiles -0.048 0.015 -0.087 0.001

Winner Dummy 0.058 0.039 0.049 0.137 Loser Dummy -0.231 0.044 -0.17 0 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .567a 0.321 0.314 0.49273

MALAYSIA

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.336 0.158 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.134 0.022 0.199 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.096 0.026 0.115 0

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.195 0.024 0.258 0 Social Trust Dummy 0.14 0.064 0.063 0.028

Organizational Membership

-0.001 0.039 -0.001 0.981

Female -0.07 0.035 -0.057 0.047

Traditionalism Index 0.185 0.037 0.146 0 Education -0.025 0.009 -0.095 0.003

Income Quintiles -0.037 0.016 -0.075 0.021

Winner Dummy 0.118 0.045 0.094 0.01

Loser Dummy -0.188 0.058 -0.119 0.001 Model Summary Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .628a 0.395 0.386 0.47529

96

MYANMAR

Model

Unstandardized Coefficients Standardized Coefficients Sig.

B Std. Error Beta

1 (Constant) 1.051 0.194 0

National Economic Evaluations

0.134 0.029 0.15 0

Family Economic Evaluations

0.043 0.034 0.04 0.209

Anti-Corruption Efforts 0.277 0.025 0.348 0

Social Trust Dummy 0.096 0.054 0.053 0.078

Organizational Membership

0.158 0.044 0.107 0

Female 0.044 0.041 0.032 0.283

Traditionalism Index 0.035 0.045 0.024 0.433

Education -0.033 0.009 -0.117 0

Income Quintiles -0.048 0.025 -0.059 0.058

Winner Dummy 0.08 0.051 0.054 0.119 Loser Dummy -0.035 0.049 -0.024 0.473 Model Summary

Model R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate 1 .492a 0.242 0.233 0.60557