American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 20

American Research Journal of Humanities & Social Science (ARJHSS)

E-ISSN: 2378-702X Volume-05, Issue-11, pp-20-30

www.arjhss.com

Research Paper Open Access Citizen Engagement in Policy Implementation at the

Parliamentary Service Commission of Kenya

1ROBERT LWANGALE KHISA, 2Dr. Edna Moi, 1Master of Arts in Public Policy and Administration, Kenyatta University, Kenya Tel: +254 711 442 287

2Kenyatta University, Nairobi – Kenya Tel: (254) 724 378 849

Corresponding author: Dr. Edna Moi Sponsorship Disclaimer The authors did not receive any funding or grant in the conduct of this research ABSTRACT:- In its Parliamentary Strategic Plan 2019-2030, the Parliamentary Service Commission highlighted the need for increased citizen involvement in legislative processes. The commission established plans to inform the public of the Parliament’s workings and laws enacted to actualize Article 118 of the Constitution on public participation and access in parliamentary processes. However, despite the Constitution of Kenya’s (2010) identification of citizen involvement as the foundation for true democracy and good governance, the process of citizen involvement in policy implementation has barely progressed in Kenya. Three objectives guided the study examining citizen involvement in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The objectives comprised “to examine citizen representation in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission,” “to assess citizen participation in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission,” and “to examine citizen engagement in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission.” To realize the set objectives, the research adopted a descriptive research design targeting 840 permanent and pensionable employees at the Parliamentary Service Commission and Embakasi East residents. The study sample comprised 90 PSC employees, administrators, and 100 citizens, selected through stratified random sampling from the five Embakasi East wards. The study employed questionnaires to obtain quantitative data on citizen involvement in the Parliamentary Service Commission policy implementation from the selected 190 respondents. Of the 190 respondents, 168 formed the basis of the study. Microsoft Excel and SPSS programs were utilized in the data analysis exercise, and the obtained data were presented through tables, charts, and figures. The descriptive analysis of the collected data consisted of frequencies, mean scores, percentages, and standard deviations. Alternatively, the inferential statistics, particularly the multiple regression analysis, helped test the three hypotheses: H01: Citizen representation has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission; H02: Citizen participation has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission; H03: Citizen engagement has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The multiple regression found 0.000 p-values for citizen representation and engagement and policy implementation and a 0.643 p-value for citizen participation and policy implementation. The study concluded that a statistically significant relationship existed between citizen representation and citizen engagement and policy implementation and a statistically insignificant relationship between citizen participation and policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Keywords: citizen engagement, citizen participation, citizen involvement, public participation, legislative process

I. INTRODUCTION Citizen engagement in Kenya is enshrined in the recently promulgated Constitution. The Constitution established the public participation normative framework, making it mandatory for citizen participation in lawmaking and policymaking processes (Mbithi et al., 2018). However, while multiple state agencies at the county

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 21

and national levels of government have attempted to comply with the Constitution, IGRTC (2017) asserted that citizen participation has gained limited success in Kenya. Inimical practices and attitudes, inadequate resources, lack of capacity, deficient civic education, legal and institutional frameworks, and the lack of enabling policy to comprise the factors that continue to impede citizen participation in Kenya (IGRTC, 2017). The Kenya Draft Policy on Public Participation (2018) asserted that the current and past citizen involvement processes and programmes had been beset with numerous challenges. Inadequate public participation funding is the most pertinent challenge to citizen involvement programmes for it affects the establishment of relevant mechanisms for management and coordination of the processes. Additionally, Ronoh et al. (2018) identified demand for incentives, political interference, lack of capacity to participate, lack of political goodwill, lack of willingness of the public to participate, and negative attitudes towards it as the primary challenges influencing citizen participation in policy implementation in Kenya. The Parliamentary Service Commission (2020) highlighted the need for increased citizen involvement in legislative processes in its Parliamentary Strategic Plan 2019-2030. The commission established plans to inform the public of the Parliament’s workings and laws enacted in order to actualize Article 118 of the Constitution on public participation and access in parliamentary processes. The commission also sought to realize an enhanced parliamentary image for sustained citizen engagement through strengthening parliamentary linkages partnerships and diplomacy as well as enhancing citizen involvement in legislation and oversight. The commission’s efforts to improve citizen involvement in legislative processes calls for an assessment of its citizen involvement methods. 1.1 Statement of research problem Despite the Constitution of Kenya’s (2010) identification of citizen involvement as the foundation for true democracy and good governance, the process of citizen involvement in policy implementation had barely progressed in the country due to numerous challenges. Some of these challenges consisted of inadequate funding to public participation, limited capacity, difficulties of provision of and access to the relevant information to the public, the slow pace in operationalisation and completion of public participation guidelines, regulations, and laws, and the lack of uniformity of the processes because of gaps in the countrywide standards and frameworks (Kenya Draft Policy on Public Participation, 2020). As a result, it is challenging for Kenyan citizens to access bills tabled in Parliament, the notice presented by the relevant Parliamentary committees for public input is insufficient, and Kenyans rarely have access to Parliamentary calls for invitations and memoranda to public hearings because of overreliance on newspapers for advertisements and the high regulation of public access to Parliament buildings (Open Government Partnership, 2018). These factors adversely impact awareness of and citizen involvement in policy implementation at legislative institutions like the Parliamentary Service Commission. The low citizen involvement in policy implementation also translated to decreased viability and efficiency in parliamentary representation, legislation, and oversight processes, as well as a lack of legitimate government policies matching public needs. Furthermore, an examination of existing studies on citizen involvement in policy implementation in Kenya indicated that a large proportionate of these studies analysed the subject matter at the county level (Awire & Nyakwara, 2019; Ketoyo, 2017; Mionki, 2019; Moi, 2019; Ndegwa & Minja, 2018; Omar & Moi, 2020; Papa, 2016; Ronoh, 2020). A few of the studies focused on public participation in policy implementation at the institutional level, and to the researcher’s knowledge, there were inadequate studies conducted at the Parliamentary Service Commission (PSC) (Amollo, 2012). To that end, this study, sought to bridge the research gap by examining citizen engagement at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The underlying research hypothesis was that citizen engagement has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The need to examine the degree of embracement of citizen engagement by the PSC emanates from the vitality of PSC’s mandate. The commission is tasked with ensuring effective and efficient functioning of the Parliament, making it a feasible area of study. It makes sure that the Members of Parliament are facilitated to discharge their constitutional mandate of oversight, legislation, and representation (Parliamentary Service Commission, 2020). The study findings would also benefit multiple stakeholders, comprising the Government of Kenya, the Parliamentary Service Commission, the public, and researchers and academicians. Regarding the Government of Kenya, the study would benefit government agencies’ decision-makers, policy implementors, and public administrators by providing them adequate information to enhance citizen participation, representation, and engagement in policy implementation. For the Parliamentary Service Commission, the study presented information on the structure, level of citizen participation, representation, and engagement, as well as recommendations for improved citizen involvement in policy implementation at the institution. To the public, the study aimed to bring awareness to the need and significance of citizen involvement in policy implementation

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 22

at the Parliamentary Service Commission by highlighting the numerous methods the public can adopt for enhanced citizen involvement. Finally, the study provided comprehensive information on citizen participation, representation, and engagement in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. By doing so, the research intended to bridge a research gap by examining various levels of citizen involvement, thus providing background information for future scholars intending to replicate the study.

II. Literature Review a. Empirical Review Despite the lack of a consensus on the ideal definition of citizen engagement in existing literature, Hope (2013) posited that one common factor among the diverse definitions is that citizen engagement is carried out by citizens and their actions, whether collective or individual, interact with society, and in most cases address the concerns or problems of the public. From this perspective, the study adopted the definition: citizen engagement explains how an active citizen participates in the life of a community to help shape the community’s future or improve conditions for others. With a focus on collective and individual forms of citizen engagement, Ekman and Amna (2012) developed three levels of citizen engagement in policy implementation. These levels encompass political participation, civic participation, and non-participation. However, the study’s focus on the political context limits the findings’ application to other fields. Contrary to Ekman and Amna (2012), Lippman and Rogers (2020) studied citizen engagement from an institutional context, primarily focusing on the effect of citizen engagement in the implementation of World Bank Group-supported projects, programs, and policies. The study found four forms of citizen engagement in policy implementation: consultations, collaboration, citizen feedback reporting, recording and collection, and citizen-led monitoring. The study considered citizen consultations tools for giving voice to various population groups, including marginalized and vulnerable groups’ needs, as well as enhancing citizen involvement, public understanding, and transparency in decision-making. Regarding collaboration, Kumagai and Iorio (2018) identified mechanisms for citizens’ collaboration in policy implementation as encompassing citizens’ juries, participatory budgeting and planning, integrity pacts, and users/citizen membership in decision-making bodies. The study also found that collaborating with citizens in policy-related decision-making events and processes could make decisions more responsive to citizens’ needs and enhance the policy outcomes’ sustainability through improved ownership by citizens. Alternatively, Sudthongkonga and Rugchatjaroen (2020) found that, individually, local government organizational leaders and citizens had no direct positive effect on policy implementation but could realize an indirect influence through collaborating under good governance. Concerning citizen feedback reporting, recording, and collection, Bhargava (2015) found that inputs from citizens can be gathered periodically on numerous dimensions of public services provided. These dimensions consist of engagement processes, resource utilisation, targeting, quality, inclusiveness, and effectiveness. The study also identified SMS/online feedback, citizen report cards, community scorecards, hotlines, focus group discussions, and satisfaction surveys as the primary tools used in collecting citizen feedback. Additionally, the study acknowledged citizen-led monitoring of reform policies, contract awards, procurement, budget execution, revenues, and service delivery of policies for enhanced transparency, improved budget execution or service delivery efficiency, and the reduction of corruption opportunities as an effective citizen engagement mechanism. Johnson (2021) established that citizen engagement played a vital role in assisting and advocating to make public institutions more effective, accountable, transparent, and contributing innovative solutions to intricate development challenges. The study also confirmed that under the ideal conditions, citizen engagement could assist governments to realize enhanced development results in developing links between citizen engagement and improved social inclusion and empowerment, governance, public financial management, and public service delivery. Additionally, the study results indicated that citizen engagement outcomes were sensitive to citizens’ willingness and capacity to engage as well as highly context specific. Also, the study stated that effective engagement could also be affected by geographic, cultural, environmental, economic, political, social, and other factors like gender dynamics. These results inferred the volatility of citizen engagement and the significance of citizens’ willingness and capacity to engage in policy implementation. Chwalisz (2017) highlighted the significance of using complementary online and offline citizen engagement methods for improved policy implementation outcomes. The study asserted that the digital space had created multiple opportunities for new forms of citizen engagement by permitting the public and the government to surpass distance and space limitations, thus increasing the number of people engaged in policy implementation. The study also found success in policy implementation could only be attained when citizens, campaigning groups, civil society organizations, and the government worked toward a common goal.

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 23

The above empirical review suggests that a majority of the studies on citizen representation and policy implementation are either somewhat outdated (Brown, 2006; Wlezien, 2002) or focused on political or electoral representation (Flothe, 2020; Katyaini et al., 2021; Nunan, 2018). These findings infer a research gap, for there lacked adequate research on citizen representation and policy implementation. Moreover, an assessment of the studies on citizen involvement and policy implementation revealed a lack of research on the Parliamentary Service Commission. Studies conducted at the Parliamentary Service Commission focused on the institution’s strategic planning practices (Lemuna & Muathe, 2021); the effects of internal audit practice on performance (Kabue, 2020); strategy implementation challenges (Amollo, 2012); and strategic change implementation (Kimathi, 2011). The study added to the knowledge regarding the commission by examining citizen involvement in policy implementation at the institution.

b. Theoretical literature The International Association of Public Participation (IAP2) spectrum was used to provide the theoretical foundation for this research. The IAP2 formulated the spectrum of citizen engagement, to demonstrate the numerous modes of engagement, ranging from informing to empowerment (Iadshead et al., 2020). The spectrum presents five citizen engagement types: inform, consult, involve, collaborate, and empower (IAP2, 2018). These five levels provide citizens with differing levels of influence over decision-making and planning. In the first mode of citizen engagement, inform, IAP2 (2019) established that information-sharing comprised a low-to-moderate agency and public involvement level. The consulting process allows citizens to contribute their preferences, opinions, or viewpoints to leaders to make informed decisions. The involving process facilitates the working together of the citizens and the leaders to ensure that the public aspirations and concerns are consistently considered and understood (Swanke, 2017). The fourth form of citizen engagement, collaboration, permits the public officials or leaders to work in partnership with the citizens in problem identification and solutions development (Pinto et al., 2021). The objective of the final form of citizen engagement, the empowering process, is to permit the citizens the final decision-making (IAP2, 2019). Generally, the various modes of engagement discussed in the spectrum of participation provided a substantial foundation for the exploration of the objective, “To examine citizen engagement in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission.”

III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

a. Research design The research design encompasses the data analysis, measurement, and collection blueprint. The current study adopted the descriptive research design. The descriptive research design evaluates a situation or phenomenon as it exists in its current state. Besides enabling accurate data collection on phenomena, the descriptive research design’s use of quantitative data and its allowance of the collection of available data through multiple research instruments like interviews, questionnaires, tests, and even observation justified its application in the current study.

b. Site of Study The study’s location was the Parliamentary Service Commission offices in Nairobi, Kenya. The Parliamentary Service Commission is among Kenya’s independent commissions founded to facilitate the smooth functioning of the Houses of Parliament, including the National Assembly of Kenya and the Senate of Kenya. The commission is located in Parliament Buildings in Nairobi County.

c. Target Population The Parliamentary Service Commission in Nairobi offices has 914 permanent and pensionable employees. Of the 914 employees, 31 work at the top-level management, 43 at the middle-level management, and 840 at the low level. The study’s target population comprised the 840 employees at the low level for ease of the data collection procedure. Additionally, the study targeted citizens from Embakasi East, which has five wards: Mihango, Utawala, Embakasi, Lower Savana, and Upper Savana. Thus, overall, the target population comprised PSC employees and Embakasi East citizens.

d. Sampling Techniques and Sample Size Sampling techniques facilitate the process of reducing the number of cases by picking a subset from a selected population to attain an inference concerning the population. Notably, the study employed stratified random sampling in selecting a sample from the target population of citizens and PSC employees. From the Embakasi East sub-county, the researcher selected 20 citizens with the respective administrators from each of

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 24

the five wards (Mihango, Utawala, Embakasi, Lower Savana, and Upper Savana). Thus, 100 citizens formed the study’s sample. The study utilized Nassiuma’s (2000) formula shown below in selecting the ideal sample from the target population of 840 PSC employees.

n = N (cv2) Cv2 + (N-1) e2 Where n was the sample size, N was the population size, cv was the coefficient of variation (0.5), and e was the margin of error or the tolerance of the desired level of confidence taken as 0.05 % at 95 % confidence level. The adoption of the 95 percent confidence level was to increase the study results’ reliability and accuracy. The formula was applied as depicted:

e. Data Collection Procedure The data collection procedure consists of an in-depth and methodical stepwise procedure that a researcher follows to realize the study objectives and the research work completion. The study began with a questionnaire formulation. The researcher utilized the conceptual framework, research gaps, study objectives, and hypotheses to formulate closed-ended questions for the research instrument. Afterward, the researcher sought approval to conduct the study. Particularly, the researcher obtained a NACOSTI letter and a letter of introduction from the university. Upon receiving approval, the researcher conducted pilot testing by administering questionnaires to nine respondents. The pilot study helped the researcher identify any questions that require modification or deletion to ensure an effective data collection exercise. Consequently, the researcher made any necessary modifications to the questionnaires before the full-scale data collection process. Then, the researcher administered the modified questionnaires to the sample of 90 low-level management employees and administrators at the Parliamentary Service Commission and 100 Embakasi East citizens.

f. Data Analysis The data analysis is vital in the data interpretation exercise for the effective answering of research questions and the realization of study objectives. As such, a broad array of statistical analysis tools and data processing software exist to aid researchers in processing, analysing, and interpreting data. However, the study primarily relied on Microsoft Excel and the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS Version 25.0) for the data processing, analysis, and interpretation processes. The data analysis process commenced with the collected questionnaires’ referencing and coding to ease the data entry procedure. Then, the researcher conducted the data cleaning process by checking the collected questionnaires for entry errors to determine whether the respondents provided the right responses. Additionally, the researcher examined the questionnaires for completion by ensuring that the respondents correctly answered all the formulated questions then input the complete data into the statistical analysis tools. The researcher then employed the selected statistical analysis tools in computing a descriptive analysis of the collected data. Notably, the researcher computed the data’s frequencies, mean scores, percentages, and standard deviations. The collected information was presented in table and figure formats. The researcher also utilized the SPSS software to compute the collected data’s inferential statistics. Particularly, the study utilized the bivariate correlation analysis and multiple regression analysis to determine the strength and direction of the relationship between citizen involvement and policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The study also used multiple regression to test the three hypotheses. The study conducted individual tests of all the independent variables (citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement) to determine whether to reject or fail to reject the null hypotheses.

IV. RESULTS

a. Response rate The study administered 190 questionnaires to the research respondents. Of the 190 questionnaires, 168 were filled and returned to the researcher, representing an 88.4 percent response rate. Fowler (2002) identified a 75 percent and above response rate as ideal in social science research, whereas Saldivar (2002) recognised 80 percent and above as the ideal response rate. Thus, the current study’s 88.4 response rate was adequate for the generalisability of the findings to the target population, the reduction of non-response bias, and improvement of the study’s reliability.

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 25

b. Descriptive Statistics Of the 168 respondents that agreed to participate in the study, 96 were male and 72 females, representing 57 and 43 percent of the respondents, respectively. Figure 4.1 depicts the respondents’ gender distribution. The respondents were classified into four age groups (18-24, 25-34, 35-44, and 45 years and above). Thirty-five respondents were aged 18 and 24 years, 61 between 25 and 34 years, 43 between 35 and 44 years, and 29 were 45 years and above. Figure 4.2 below shows their age distribution. Of the 168 respondents, 56 were single, 60 were married, 26 were widowed, and 26 were separated or divorced. Figure 4.3 below shows the respondents’ marital status distribution. Most of the respondents (36 percent) were married, whereas the least number of the respondents (15 percent) were widowed, separated, or divorced. The study aimed to collect data from 100 citizens and 90 Parliamentary Service Commission employees and administrators regarding the respondents’ designations. Instead, the study obtained data from 91 citizens, 68 Parliamentary Service Commission employees, and nine administrators. Figure 4.5 below indicates an allotment of the respondents’ designation.

c. Policy Implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission In determining the contribution of citizen involvement to policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission, the study asked the respondents whether they thought citizen involvement played a critical role in policy implementation at the commission. Figure 4.8 below depicts their responses.

Figure 4.1: Citizen Involvement and Policy Implementation Source: Survey Data (2022) As illustrated in Figure 4.8 above, 63 percent of the respondents asserted that citizen involvement played a vital role in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Alternatively, 37 percent reported that citizen involvement did not play an essential role in policy implementation at the commission. These findings indicated an agreement among most respondents on the significance of citizen involvement in enhancing policy implementation at the commission. Moreover, the study inquired about the extent to which the respondents believed citizen involvement impacted policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Table 4.8 indicates the consequent responses.

Table 4.1: Policy Implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission Characteristics N (%) Citizen involvement in policy implementation causes increased attainment of policy goals at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

Very low extent 35 (21%) Low extent 27 (16%) Moderate extent 47 (28%) High extent 27 (16%) Very high extent 32 (19%)

63%

37%

Citizen Involvement and Policy

Implementation

Yes

No

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 26

Citizen involvement in policy implementation increases policy acceptability at the grassroots level.

Very low extent 20 (12%) Low extent 27 (16%)

Moderate extent 47 (28%) High extent 42 (25%)

Very high extent 32 (19%)

Citizen involvement causes the timely implementation of policies at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

Very low extent 37 (22%) Low extent 27 (17%) Moderate extent 54 (32%) High extent 30 (18%)

Very high extent 20 (12%) Citizen involvement in policy implementation improves performance at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

Very low extent 32 (19%)

Low extent 27 (16%)

Moderate extent 40 (24%)

High extent 35 (21%)

Very high extent 34 (20%)

Citizen involvement in policy implementation enhances accountability at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

Very low extent 22 (13%) Low extent 25 (15%)

Moderate extent 47 (28%)

High extent 40 (24%)

Very high extent 34 (20%)

Citizen involvement in policy implementation improves transparency at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

Very low extent 25 (15%) Low extent 32 (19%)

Moderate extent 40 (24%)

High extent 35 (21%)

Very high extent 36 (21%) Citizen involvement in policy implementation enhances service delivery at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

Very low extent 25 (15%)

Low extent 22(13%)

Moderate extent 42 (25%) High extent 49 (29%)

Very high extent 30 (18%)

Source: Survey Data (2022)

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 27

An examination of the responses indicated a significant variation in the respondents’ perceptions of how citizen involvement contributed to policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. However, a majority of the respondents assented that citizen involvement impacted policy implementation to a moderate to a great extent. Also, they all agreed that citizen involvement caused increased attainment of policy goals, increased policy acceptability at the grassroots level, caused the timely implementation of policies, improved performance, accountability and transparency, and enhanced service delivery at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Therefore, the findings ascertained that citizen involvement positively affected policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Besides, for a more in-depth assessment of the effect of citizen involvement on policy implementation at the commission, the study performed the inferential statistical analysis.

d. Inferential Statistics The study performed a correlation and multiple regression analysis to examine the effects of citizen involvement on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement encompassed the independent variables, whereas policy implementation comprised the dependent variable. 1.1.1 Correlation Analysis The research employed a bivariate correlation analysis in defining the strength of the relationship between the dependent variable (policy implementation) and independent variables (citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement). Table 4.9 illustrates the correlation analysis results.

Table 4.2: Correlation Analysis Citizen Representation

Citizen Participation

Citizen Engagement

Policy Implementation Citizen Representation Coefficient 1.00 .29 .82 .83 Sig. .000 .000 .000 Citizen Participation Coefficient .29 1.00 .42 .39 Sig. .000 .000 .000 Citizen Engagement Coefficient .82 .42 1.00 .93 Sig. .000 .000 .000 Policy Implementation Coefficient .83 .39 .93 1.00 Sig. .000 .000 .000 Source: Survey Data (2022) As indicated in Table 4.9, the bivariate correlation returned positive R values of 0.83, 0.39, and 0.93 between citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement and policy implementation. These positive values suggested a positive relationship between each of the independent variables (citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement) and policy implementation. Besides, the high R values of 0.83 between citizen representation and policy implementation and 0.93 between citizen engagement and policy implementation inferred very strong correlations between citizen representation and citizen engagement and policy implementation. Oppositely, the 0.39 R-value depicted a weak relationship between citizen participation and policy implementation. Nonetheless, these findings inferred that an increase in either citizen representation, citizen participation, or citizen engagement increased policy implementation outcomes at the Parliamentary Service Commission. 1.1.2 Multiple Regression Analysis The study adopted a multiple regression analysis to evaluate the relationship between the dependent variable (policy implementation) and the dependent variables (citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement). Table 4.10 below is a depiction of the obtained regression model summary.

Table 4.3: Regression Model Summary R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate .94 .87 .87 .48 Source: Survey Data (2022)

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 28

The R-value in Table 4.10 above comprised the multiple correlation coefficient. The R-value of 0.94 indicated a good level of prediction of policy implementation by the independent variables, citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement. The R Square value encompassed the coefficient of determination. The 0.87 value meant that 87 percent of the variation in the dependent variable (policy implementation) could be explained by the independent variables’ variance. This finding showed that the regression model could properly account for the observed data, meaning that the model is a good fit for the data. The 0.87 Adjusted R Square value confirmed the regression model’s fitness and how well the independent variables (citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement) explained the variation in policy implementation, the dependent variable. Besides, the Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) framework formed the foundation for the study’s discussion of the regression model’s variability levels and significance tests. Table 4.11 below presents the ANOVA results.

Table 4.4: ANOVA Results Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Sig. Regression 269.12 3 89.71 382.02 .000 Residual 38.51 164 .23 Total 307.63 167 Source: Survey Data (2022) The regression sum of squares was 269.12, whereas the total sum of squares was 307.63, as shown in Table 4.11 above. These findings backed the initial findings that the regression model could account for approximately 87 percent (307.63/269.12) of all the variability in the dataset. The residual sum of squares value of 38.51 (the error sum of squares) consisted of the dependent variable’s total variation that the regression model could not explain. The low value meant that the regression model could account for the data set’s variation. The 0.000 p-value was below the 0.05 significance level, hence supporting the null hypothesis rejection. Besides, the F value of 382.02 exceeded the computed F critical value of 2.66, supporting the null hypothesis rejection with 95 percent confidence that the variance in the dependent variable was not due to chance. These findings indicated that the three independent variables (citizen representation, citizen participation, and citizen engagement) statistically significantly predicted the dependent variable (policy implementation). In determining the independent variables’ statistical significance, the study utilised the regression coefficients in Table 4.12 below.

Table 4.5: Regression Coefficients Unstandardized Coefficients

Standardized Coefficients B Std. Error Beta t Sig. (Constant) -1.02 .32 .00 -3.20 .002 Citizen Representation .63 .13 .23 4.78 .000 Citizen Participation .08 .18 .01 .46 .643 Citizen Engagement 1.31 .09 .73 14.43 .000 Source: Survey Data (2022) The Unstandardized coefficients in Table 4.12 above signified how much policy implementation, the dependent variable, varied with an independent variable when all other independent variables were held constant. For instance, the 0.63 Unstandardized B coefficient for citizen representation signalled that one unit increase in citizen representation resulted in a 0.63 increase in policy implementation outcomes at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Similarly, one unit increase in citizen participation and engagement led to a 0.08 and 1.31 increase in policy implementation outcomes. These findings suggested that citizen engagement had the highest effect on policy implementation, whereas citizen participation had the least effect. Besides, an assessment of the p-values of each independent variable (from the Sig. column) showed that the citizen representation and citizen engagement variables were below the 0.05 significance level. These findings meant a statistically significant relationship between citizen representation, citizen engagement, and policy implementation. Contrarily, the high p-value of 0.643 (exceeding the 0.05 significance level) in the citizen participation variable inferred insufficient evidence in the sample to deduce that a non-zero correlation existed between citizen participation and policy implementation.

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 29

Moreover, the study derived the regression model below from the beta coefficient results in Table 4.12. Y = -1.02 + 0.463X₁ + 0.23X2 + 0.73X3 + ɛ Where: Y signified policy implementation (the dependent variable) X1 signified citizen representation X2 signified citizen participation X3 signified citizen engagement ɛ signified the error term 1.1.3 Hypothesis Testing The study utilised the regression results in testing the null hypotheses that citizen engagement has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Table 4.13 below portrays a summary of the hypotheses test results.

Table 4.6: Hypotheses Test Results Hypothesis P value Deduction Citizen engagement has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission

0.000 Null hypothesis rejected.

Source: Survey Data (2022) As illustrated in Table 4.13 above, the p-value of 0.000 for citizen engagement backed the rejection of the null hypothesis: H03: Citizen Engagement has no significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Therefore, the study results suggested that citizen engagement had a significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

V. CONCLUSION The study identified the citizen engagement techniques utilised at the Parliamentary Service Commission as encompassing informing, consultation, involvement, collaboration, and empowerment methods. The identified informing mechanisms used in engaging citizens in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission comprised the Parliamentary service commission website, paid advertising, education and awareness programs, and social media. However, the number of respondents aware of these mechanisms was low (between 9 and 37 percent of the respondents). Similarly, only 5 to 46 percent of the respondents were aware of the commission's consultation processes (committees, focus groups, and public meetings). Of the three consultation mechanisms, the respondents were more aware of public meetings and least aware of focus groups as techniques employed in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Also, a very small proportion of the respondents were aware of the involvement, collaboration, and empowerment mechanisms in engaging citizens in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Only 14 to 31 percent of the respondents were aware of the involvement methods (deliberative polling, workshops, questionnaires, and online surveys). Between 18 and 19 percent of the respondents identified collaboration mechanisms (citizen advisory committees/boards, consensus building, citizen panels, and participatory decision-making mechanisms) used at the commission. Lastly, only 16 to 19 percent of the respondents identified empowerment mechanisms comprising deliberative forums, community-based monitoring, delegated decisions, and citizen juries to engage citizens in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Besides, most respondents felt that the commission had applied a low to the moderate extent of citizen engagement techniques in policy implementation. The vicariate correlation analysis found a 0.93 R-value concerning citizen representation and policy implementation. This value indicated a strong positive correlation between citizen representation and policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Alternatively, the multiple regression analysis results found a 0.000 p-value, which meant a statistically significant relationship between citizen representation and policy implementation. The findings also supported the null hypothesis rejection, hence establishing that citizen engagement had a significant effect on policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Based on the conclusions, the research recommends an improvement of awareness of the citizen representation, participation, and engagement techniques in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The commission can enhance the citizens’ awareness of the citizen involvement mechanisms by employing online technologies such as social networking sites and other mass media such as television to inform the Kenyan public of the various techniques used in involving citizens in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission. The commission should also perform extensive and intensive education and awareness programs to educate and inform Kenyans of the citizen involvement mechanisms in policy implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission.

American Research Journal of Humanities Social Science (ARJHSS)R) 2022

ARJHSS Journal www.arjhss.com Page | 30

Besides, the commission should ensure that all Kenyan citizens are well represented during the policy implementation process at the Parliamentary Service Commission. Notably, they should ensure that the elected, non-elected, youth, persons with disabilities, women, marginalized communities, and ethnic and minority representatives comprehensively represent the citizens’ interests. They could do so by ensuring that the representatives constantly meet and collect information from the citizens through public meetings, focus groups, surveys, deliberative forums, and social media, among other sources.

REFERENCES [1]. Adshead, M., Boyle, R., & Colgan, A. (2020). A review of citizen engagement in our public service. Administration, 68(3), 23–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.2478/admin-2020-0014 [2]. Amollo, L. (2012). Challenges of Strategy Implementation at the Parliamentary Service Commission of Kenya (The Degree of Master of Business Administration (MBA). University of Nairobi. [3]. Arnstein, S. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American Institute of Planners, 35(4), 216–224. [4]. Awire, J.W. & Nyakwara, S. (2019). Analysis of Public Participation on Budget Implementation in Kisii County Government, Kenya. European Journal of Business and Management, 11(29), 68-79. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/270185139.pdf [5]. Brown, M.B. (2006). Survey Article: Citizen Panels and the Concept of Representation. Journal of Political Philosophy, 14(2), 203–225. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9760.2006.00245.x [6]. Flothe, L. (2020). Representation through information? When and why interest groups inform policymakers about public preferences. Journal of European Public Policy, 27(4), 528-546. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2019.1599042 [7]. IAP2. (2019). Spectrum of Public Participation. International Association for Public Participation. [8]. Kimathi, L.G. (2011). Implementation of strategic change at Parliamentary Service Commission (Degree of Master in Business Administration). University of Nairobi. [9]. Lemuna, M.M. & Muathe, S. (2021). Strategic Planning Practices and Performance: The Story So Far in Parliamentary Service Commission in Kenya. European Scientific Journal, 17(27), 261-281. https://doi.org/10.19044/esj.2021.v17n27p261 [10]. Lowery, D. (2015). Images of an unbiased interest system. Journal of European Public Policy, 22(8),

1212–1231. [11]. Mapuva, J. & Mapuva, L.M. (2015). Arnstein’s Ladder of Participation and Citizen Participation in

Zimbabwe. International Journal of African and Asian Studies, 11, 1-14. [12]. Mbithi, A., Ndambuki, D., & Juma, F.O. (2018). Determinants of Public Participation in Kenya County

Governments. Journal of Asian and African Studies, 54(2), 1-9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0021909618794028 [13]. Moi, E. (2019). Influence of citizens’ involvement on governance of projects in devolved governments

in Kenya (Doctor of Philosophy). Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology. [14]. Nassiuma D. K. (2000). Survey sampling: Theory and methods. Egerton University Press. [15]. Nunan, F. (2018). Navigating multi‐level natural resource governance: An analytical guide. Natural

Resources Forum, 42, 159–171. [16]. Omar, S. & Moi, E. (2020). Determinants of public participation in implementation of development

projects in Kenya: A case study of Wajir County Government water projects. International Academic Journal of Law and Society, 1(3), 68-84. [17]. Papa, R. (2016). Factors influencing public participation in project development in Busia County

Kenya (Degree of Master of Arts in Project Planning and Management). University of Nairobi. [18]. Parliamentary Service Commission. (2020). Parliamentary Service Commission-Strategic Plan (2019 2030) (pp. 1-31). Parliamentary Service Commission. Retrieved from http://www.parliament.go.ke/sites/default/files/2020-02/Parliamentary%20Strategic%20Plan.pdf [19]. Ronoh, G., Mulongo, L.S.& Kurgat, A. (2018). Challenges of integrating public participation in the

devolved system of governance for sustainable development in Kenya. International Journal of Economics, Commerce, and Management, 6(1), 476-491. http://ijecm.co.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2018/01/6132.pdf [20]. Susskind, L. & Carson, L. (2008). The IAP2 Spectrum: Larry Susskind, in Conversation with IAP2

Members. International Journal of Public Participation, 2(2), 67-84. Corresponding author: Dr. Edna Moi 2Kenyatta University, Nairobi – Kenya Tel: (254) 724 378 849