1

Examining Macroeconomic Determinants of Trust in Parliament:

A Dynamic Multilevel Framework

Anna Ruelens1, Bart Meuleman2, Ides Nicaise1

Accepted for publication in Social Science Research

Abstract The extensive literature on political trust has long suggested a link between macroeconomic

conditions and public trust in political institutions. However, empirical evidence regarding this

relationship remains ambiguous. Conflicting results appear to be related to differences in research

design: while cross-sectional studies tend not to find evidence of a link between macroeconomic

variables and trust in political institutions, most longitudinal studies do. In this paper, using recent

advances in multilevel methodology, we examine both cross-sectional and longitudinal effects of

macroeconomic variables on trust in national parliament within a single dynamic multilevel framework.

By analyzing all seven waves of the European Social Survey (2002-2014), we demonstrate that declining

macroeconomic performance has a negative within-country effect on trust in national parliament. At the

same time, we find limited evidence in support of this association at the between-country level. This

discrepancy suggests the presence of confounding factors that are unaccounted for in cross-sectional

designs. We therefore argue for the importance of examining within-country effects as they provide a

more stringent test of causality.

Keywords: political trust, trust in parliament, macroeconomic performance, European Social Survey,

multilevel modeling

1 Research Institute for Work and Society, University of Leuven, Belgium

2 Centre for Sociological Research, University of Leuven, Belgium

2

1. Introduction

Researchers of political trust1 have begun to develop increasingly comprehensive models that combine

individual and macro-level characteristics, as well as the interplay between them. The motivating

premise underlying these studies is that trust in political institutions, such as national parliaments,

constitutes a complex phenomenon and that its determinants are not limited to the factors at the micro level (Van der Meer, 2010). To complement the explanations emphasizing individual-level

characteristics, most studies focused on exploring the link between different aspects of macroeconomic

performance and political trust. In recent years, following the financial and economic crisis of 2008 2009, there has been a significant increase in studies examining the relationship between

macroeconomic performance and trust. Although few would deny the relevance of macroeconomic

characteristics in relation to political trust, the exact nature of this relationship remains unclear. In fact,

the empirical literature examining the relationship between objective macroeconomic performance and

trust in political institutions has been equivocal, reporting positive relationships between

macroeconomic variables and trust in some cases and negative or null relationships in other cases (cf.

Clarke et al., 1993; Cusack, 1999; Miller and Listhaug, 1999; Dalton, 2004; Van der Meer, 2010;

Hakhverdian and Mayne, 2012; Van der Meer and Hakhverdian, 2017).

Given the conflicting pattern of results, there is a general concern in political trust literature about the

consistency of evidence supporting a causal relationship between contextual factors and political trust

(Zmerli and Van der Meer, 2017). In light of such comments, our study is set to examine one potential

source of contradictory findings in the past research. Specifically, we argue that inconsistent findings of

prior studies may have resulted from methodological differences in research design. Indeed, while cross sectional studies tend not to find evidence of a link between macroeconomic performance and trust in

political institutions, most studies employing a longitudinal design or time-series analysis do (e.g.

Anderson, 2009; Clarke et al., 1993; Cusack, 1999; Mishler and Rose, 2001). The difference is that the

cross-sectional studies analyze the effects of macroeconomic variables on trust between countries

(between-country effects) whereas longitudinal studies rely on within-country analysis. Each of these

designs is characterized by certain advantages and limitations. The cross-sectional design is static as it

considers data at a single time point (i.e. a year or a survey wave). By relying on a snapshot in time,

studies that employ a cross-sectional design are vulnerable to the influence of confounding factors that

are difficult to remove. Therefore, a demonstration of cross-sectional differences alone does not provide

conclusive evidence of a causal role of contextual characteristics in influencing political trust.

Longitudinal studies that analyze changes in political trust over time may be especially useful in

1 Although there is some debate on whether institutional trust, political trust and political confidence refer to the

same concept, in the current literature these terms are often used interchangeably.

3

shedding additional light on the relationship between macroeconomic performance and political trust.

Yet, to date, most longitudinal studies on trust in political institutions have primarily relied on

aggregated survey data (e.g., Mishler and Rose, 2001), or on a single-country study (e.g. Poznyak et al.,

2014) and, therefore, have limited generalizability to other spatial and temporal contexts.

In this paper, using recent advances in multilevel methodology, we provide a methodologically rigorous

examination of the effects of macroeconomic characteristics on public trust in national parliaments. The

present study contributes to the political trust literature in a number of ways. First, while prior studies

focus either on a period of stability or a period of economic turmoil, we are able to examine the evolution

of trust in national parliament for a more extended period, namely from 2002 to 2014, by using all seven

waves of the European Social Survey (ESS). Examining a longer time span is important considering that

contextual effects can have different influence in normal and crisis times (Kumlin and Haugsgjerd,

2017). Second, in the present study, we apply a more dynamic view by focusing on longitudinal (within ) as well as cross-sectional (between-) effects of macroeconomic variables. This strategy allows us to

examine not only the effect of macroeconomic context on between-country differences in political trust

but also its effects on the differences within countries over time. At the same time, by using multilevel

approach, we simultaneously control for compositional effects of each national sample. Altogether, this

work contributes new theoretical and empirical insights to the established debate regarding the

relationship between macroeconomic performance and political trust.

2. Theoretical background

Although a wide variety of political trust definitions exist, there is a converging understanding of

political trust as a basic relational and evaluative orientation towards political institutions and actors

with the expectation that these institutions and actors will act according to one’s interest and normative

disposition (Van der Meer, 2010; Hakhverdian and Mayne, 2012; cf. Newton, 1999; Levi and Stoker,

2000; Hetherington, 1998). Political trust is not only an essential prerequisite for the functioning of the

democratic institutions, such as domestic parliaments (Easton, 1965; Mishler and Rose, 2001; Newton,

2001; Kumlin and Rothstein, 2005; Keele, 2007; Freitag and Buhlmann, 2009) but it also, together with

norms and values, constitutes a fundamental component of social capital (Van Oorschot and Arts, 2005).

Recent scholarship on political trust has become increasingly interested in the performative evaluation

of the state (Kumlin and Haugsgjerd, 2017). Specifically, ‘trust-as-evaluation’ perspective suggests that

the evaluation of the actual performance of the state may impact the levels of political trust at the

individual level (Van der Meer, 2017). To date, most empirical and theoretical work that adopts a

performance-oriented framework has been concerned with a single policy domain, namely

macroeconomic performance.

4

The proponents of the political economy perspective have long argued that institutional ability in

meeting the socio-economic demands of the citizenry represents a key determinant of public trust in

political institutions (Lipset 1960; Offe 1984). According to this view, public support of political

institutions depends on the economic performance of the country (Miller and Listhaug, 1999). Both

egotropic and sociotropic concerns of the individuals regarding their economic situation have been

linked to changes in attitudes towards political institutions (Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier, 2000).

Egotropic concerns relate to the direct individual experiences of economic vulnerability that can be

either transitory or stable. In contrast, sociotropic concerns reflect the overall assessment of economic

conditions in the country regardless of individual economic circumstances. To illustrate these two types

of subjective evaluations, it may be helpful to consider an example of an economic crisis, typically

characterized by economic contraction and increased unemployment. At the individual level,

experiences of unemployment and loss of income constitute the key examples relating to egotropic

concerns. Sociotropic concerns, on the other hand, can reflect a general anxiety of citizens about a

worsening economic situation in the country and dissatisfaction with the performance of political

institutions in handling the consequences of the crisis. It is clear that both types of reactions can be

affected by the actual macroeconomic performance of the state.

At the individual level, a number of studies examining the utility of egotropic evaluations point out to

the importance of class structure and socioeconomic status, as key determinants of political trust (Lipset

1960; Hout et al., 1995; Clarke et al., 1993). In particular, this logic suggests that political trust is lower

among individuals in more economically vulnerable positions, such as poor and low-educated. Recent

studies have also established a connection between the experience of unemployment and lower levels

of trust (Polavieja, 2013; Van Erkel and Van der Meer, 2016). As an alternative, a sociotropic

perspective focuses on establishing the link between trust in political institutions and individual

perceptions of macroeconomic performance (also termed ‘retrospective evaluations’ see Torcal, 2014).

Studies using this approach, tend to find a strong connection between a subjective opinion about national

economic performance and political trust (e.g., Citrin and Green, 1986; Hetherington and Rudolph,

2008; Van der Meer and Dekker, 2011, Ellinas and Lambrianou, 2014). However, as aptly observed by

Van Erkel and Van der Meer (2016): “these subjective evaluations tell us little about actual [emphasis

is ours] macroeconomic effects” (p. 177).

In contrast to the studies focusing on subjective individual factors (either individual characteristics or

perceptions of economic situation), the role of objective economic performance in determining political

trust remains a subject of debate (Van der Meer, 2017; Van der Meer and Hakhverdian, 2017). Many

argue that political trust benefits from solid macroeconomic performance (e.g., Clarke et al., 1993;

Cusack, 1999; Miller and Listhaug, 1999; Taylor, 2000; Anderson, 2009). Given that citizens use a

country’s economic performance as a main criterion for judging political performance it is not surprising

that in times of economic prosperity public trust in national political institutions tends to rise, while in

5

times of economic crisis, it tends to suffer. Still other empirical studies do not confirm a significant

relationship between macroeconomic performance and political trust (e.g., Dalton, 2004; Van der Meer,

2010). Furthermore, more recent research has emphasized the importance of political aspects of

government performance, such as public sector corruption, in determining political trust (Della Porta,

2000; Anderson and Tverdova, 2003; Morris and Klesner, 2010; Uslaner 2017). According to this

perspective, public-sector corruption undermines the performance of political institutions and results in

unresponsiveness to citizens’ demands and expectations (Hakverdian and Mayne, 2012; Torcal, 2014).

In the latest empirical work examining the determinants of political trust, corruption serves as a rival

explanation to the influence of macroeconomic performance. For example, on the basis of the ESS data

Van der Meer (2010) concludes that corruption has “a consistent, negative effect on trust in parliament”

(p. 530) while no effect of the actual economic performance on trust in parliament is found. Similarly,

Van der Meer and Hakverdian (2017), using cross-sectional data from the European Value Survey 2008,

find that macroeconomic characteristics lose their significance once corruption is taken into account.

The authors, however, emphasize that it is essential to conduct within-country, longitudinal analyses

before definite conclusions about the relationship between macroeconomic performance and trust can

be made (Van der Meer and Hakverdian, 2017).

3. Current study and research hypotheses

3.1. A dynamic approach to studying macroeconomic effects

The conflicting pattern of results constitutes ‘the perception-performance paradox’ of macroeconomic

performance in its influence on political trust (Van der Meer, 2017). A potentially important explanation

for this paradox is methodological, relating to the research design used to assess the relationship between

macroeconomic performance and political trust (cf. Van Erkel and Van der Meer, 2016). In the past,

most of the studies examining the role of objective macroeconomic characteristics relied on cross sectional designs that measure the effect of macroeconomic variables at a single point in time. A well known drawback of the traditional cross-sectional design is the relatively weak internal validity: this

design does not allow to establish causal claims about the relationships between contextual variables at

the country level and individual-level outcomes. Cross-sectional evidence that economically better performing countries have higher levels of political trust hardly confirms that macroeconomic factors

determine citizens’ levels of political trust, because the presence of confounding variables (e.g. the

welfare regime) cannot be ruled out and the temporal order cannot be ascertained. In contrast, if one

would observe that trust in national parliaments decreases after a period of economic downturn, then the

evidence for a causal relationship between macroeconomic performance and political trust is much

stronger. Supporting this view, a number of recent studies on political trust have criticized the use of the

6

cross-sectional design and have recommended the use of longitudinal designs (Armingeon and

Guthmann, 2014; Van Erkel and Van der Meer, 2016; Van der Meer and Hakhverdian, 2017; Van der

Meer, 2017). Unfortunately, comparative longitudinal data on individual attitudinal variables are scarce,

and the results derived from single-country time-series designs (e.g. Poznyak et al., 2014) are not

generalizable directly to other contexts.

In order to address this challenge, the present study implements a recently developed multilevel model

that decomposes the cross-sectional and longitudinal components at the context level, while

simultaneously controlling for compositional effects at the individual level (Allison, 2009; Schunck,

2013; Curran and Bauer, 2011; Fairbrother, 2014; Schmidt-Catran, 2016; Meuleman et al., 2017). Such

a dynamic model for repeated cross-sectional, cross-national data combines the strength of comparative

cross-sections (that is, the wide range of comparison across countries) and longitudinal models (the

focus on change over time). Concretely, this model, separates cross-sectional and longitudinal effects of

macroeconomic factors on trust in national parliament. To elaborate, when considering macroeconomic

factors, cross-sectional effects refer to the relationship between macroeconomic characteristics and trust

in national parliament between countries (i.e. national parliaments in countries with stronger

macroeconomic performances enjoy more trust), while longitudinal effects refer to the relationship

between changes in macroeconomic characteristics and political trust within a country (i.e. the stronger

a country’s macroeconomic performance becomes the more trust its national parliament will enjoy). In

addition to the advantages outlined above, by using this modeling approach, we are able to examine a

longer time span that includes a period of relative economic stability and a period of the economic crisis.

Given the wide variation in the effects of the crisis on countries’ macroeconomic performance, the

context of the crisis provides a quasi-natural experimental setting for testing our hypotheses.

3.2. Research hypotheses

Considering the theoretical propositions discussed above, we formulate a set of hypotheses regarding

the relationship between trust in national parliament and the individual and macroeconomic

characteristics. Drawing on the individual-level explanations, we expect that lower socioeconomic status

is negatively associated with trust in domestic parliaments (Hypothesis 1). Moreover, according to the

proponents of the political economy perspective, poor macroeconomic performance results in lower

levels of political trust. It follows then that the higher a country’s level of macroeconomic performance,

the more citizens are likely to trust the national parliament (between-country effects) (Hypothesis 2).

Furthermore, we expect that the relationship between macroeconomic performance and trust in

parliament also holds longitudinally. This implies that the positive changes in national macroeconomic

performance are positively related to changes in trust in domestic parliaments (within-country effects)

(Hypothesis 3). Finally, to test a competing explanation for the level and changes in public trust in

7

parliament, namely corruption, we evaluate the following alternative hypothesis: the relationship

between macroeconomic performance and trust in parliament will be insignificant both between and

within countries, once we control for corruption at the country level (Hypothesis 4). 2

4. Data and measurements

Data

This study investigates the relationship between macroeconomic performance and political trust in

national parliament. To test our hypotheses, we combine data from different sources. The individual level data are available through the European Social Survey (ESS), 2002-2014. The ESS is a high quality

biennial comparative survey, frequently used in research on political trust (e.g. Listhaug and Ringdal,

2008; Marien, 2011: Van der Meer, 2010). The item of trust in national parliaments analyzed in this

study belongs to the core ESS module. This core module, repeated every two years, allows us to combine

all seven waves of the ESS survey. Our final sample includes 28 countries, 157 country-periods, and

295,226 individual respondents. The number of respondents per country and per ESS wave is

summarized in Supplementary Materials, Table 1. For this study, individual-level data were combined

with country-level data on macroeconomic performance and control of corruption provided by the

World Bank.

Measures

Dependent variable

Trust in national parliament is operationalized by using the European Social Survey’s question to what

extent citizens trust their national parliament. The individual responses are recorded on eleven-point

scale ranging from 0 (‘having no trust at all’) to 10 (‘having complete trust’). The official question

wording used in the ESS was: “Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you

personally trust each of the institutions I read out [here country’s parliament]. 0 means you do not trust

an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust.”

2 We have chosen not to include a hypothesis regarding sociotropic concerns for two main reasons: 1) the relevance

of subjective evaluations of macroeconomic performance is firmly established in the literature; 2) our inclusion of

a measure of perception of economic performance may lead to underestimating the effect of objective

macroeconomic indicators on political trust, considering that part of the objective performance is incorporated into

the subjective evaluation (see also comment of Van der Meer (2017) regarding the studies of Rahn and Rudolph

(2005) and Oskarsson (2010)).

8

Independent and control variables

To capture the effects of macroeconomic performance, we use the data on the real GDP growth rate and

the unemployment rate (% of total labour force), provided by the World Bank. These two indicators are

most indicative of the condition of the national economy and are most frequently used in the literature

to capture the effects of macroeconomic performance (Dolan et al., 2009; Van der Meer, 2010; Van

Erkel and Van der Meer, 2016). To control for the effect of corruption, we use the Control of Corruption

(CCI) indicator, one of the key Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) from the World Bank. This

indicator provides country scores ranging between -2.5 and 2.5 with higher scores indicating greater

perceived control of corruption (Kaufmann et al., 2011). The Corruption Perception Index (CPI),

published by Transparency International (TI), often serves as an alternative indicator of perceived

corruption. However, the changes in methodology in the CPI over the time period used in this study do

not allow for making valid comparisons over time (Rohwer, 2009). Although the Control of Corruption

indicator might also not be an ideal measure for longitudinal comparisons, it offers more consistency

across time. In addition, the correlation between the two corruption measures (CCI and CPI) is generally

reported to be very high (e.g. corr. = 0.97 in Bohara et al., 2004) which increases our confidence in this

indicator. Lastly, given that previous research suggests a link between political trust and the former

communist regime (e.g. Mishler and Rose, 2001; Van der Meer and Dekker, 2011; Závecz, 2017), we

include a dummy variable for former communist countries as a control variable into the analysis. Table

2 in the online supplement gives an overview of the descriptive statistics for the independent variables

at the country level.

In keeping with our hypotheses and prior research, we include the following variables at the individual

level: respondent’s gender (female as reference); age (in years) and the squared term of age; employment

status measured as the main activity of a respondent in the last seven days and operationalized using ten

constructed categories (white collar as reference, self-employed, higher service class, blue collar,

unemployed, retired, in education, doing housework, disabled, and other), and the degree of urbanization

of the respondent (recoded as 1 ‘living in farm or home in countryside’ to 5 ‘living in a big city’). As a

proxy for socioeconomic status, we use educational level measured in years of full-time education

completed.3 In addition to the control variables, empirical research on political trust suggests a number

of potentially influential variables at the individual level to be included into analysis. Specifically,

financial situation is operationalized using the ESS subjective income item asking respondents to

indicate their feeling about household’s present income ranging from ‘living comfortably’ to ‘very

difficult’. Since this item is originally reverse coded, we recoded the scores so that a higher score

3 While we can also operationalize educational background by using separate categories we choose to use a

continuous measure to facilitate interpretation.

9

indicates people who see themselves as living more comfortably on the present income. Additionally,

respondents’ political views may be important for their trust attitudes (Torcal, 2014; Van Erkel and Van

Der Meer, 2016). Accordingly, we introduce the self-positioning of the individual on the political

spectrum into the analysis by using the ESS item asking respondents about their position on an

ideological scale ranging from left ‘0’ to right ‘10’. We divide this scale into three groups: left (scores

0 to 4), center (score 5), and right (scores 6 to 10), and add a fourth category to account for missing data

on this item. Furthermore, we include a measure of religiosity operationalized using the mean of three

ESS items reflecting various aspects of religious involvement, namely, religious attendance (ranging

from 1 ‘never’ to 7 ‘every day’), frequency of praying (ranging from 1 ‘never’ to 7 ‘every day’), and

subjective religiosity (ranging from 0 ‘not at all religious’ to 10 ‘very religious’). Finally, we also include

a variable that indicates whether an individual is a member of minority (member of majority as

reference) based on the data from three separate ESS indicators: (1) self-identification of belonging to a

minority ethnic group in the country, (2) not being a citizen of the country and (3) not being born in the

country. Table 3 in the online supplement provides an overview of the descriptive statistics for the

independent variables and for the control variables at the individual level.

5. Modeling strategy

Given that our hypotheses predict the effects of individual- and contextual factors on political trust in a

dynamic perspective, we use the modeling strategy that combines individual-, country-period-, and

country-level data. We take advantage of multilevel modeling by estimating a series of models with

between-country and within-country effects to determine the relationship between macroeconomic

performance and political trust in country’s parliament (for other examples of applications, see

Fairbrother, 2014; Bell and Jones, 2015; Schmidt-Catran, 2014; Meuleman et al., 2017). In the absence

of the individual time-series data, such a ‘between-within’ approach allows us to use cross-national

survey data sampled in various time-points in order to account for the causal relationships. Accordingly,

we specify the following baseline multilevel model in its general form:

𝑦𝑖𝑡𝑗= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑗+ 𝑣1𝑗𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑗+ 𝑣0𝑗+ 𝑢0𝑡𝑗+ 𝑒𝑖𝑡𝑗, (1)

with random effects following normal distribution with a mean of 0 and constant variance 𝜎2:

𝑣0𝑗~𝑁(0, 𝜎𝜈0

2 )

𝑣1𝑗~𝑁(0, 𝜎𝜈1

2 )

𝑢0𝑡𝑗~𝑁(0, 𝜎𝑢2)

𝑒𝑖𝑡𝑗~𝑁(0, 𝜎𝑒2). (2)

10

In (1), yitj is the level of political trust of individual respondent i, surveyed at time t in country j. At the

second or the country-period level, we include the indicator of time as a fixed effect to account for the

longitudinal or change effect. This indicator represents a growth curve on a societal level (Fairbrother,

2014; Meuleman et al., 2017). In turn, 𝛽0 is a grand intercept that indicates the predicted level of trust

when the time indicator equals zero. Since we grand-mean centered the time, 𝛽0 is the level of trust in

the middle of time series. Time can be modeled as a linear effect, as shown in (1), or can be included as

a more complex effect i.e. quadratic or cubic. Random components include a random effect for the

intercept (𝑣0𝑗), a random effect for the slope (𝑣1𝑗), a random component at the country-period level

(𝑢0𝑡𝑗) indicating a country-period deviation from the average growth curve, and a random effect at the

individual level (𝑒𝑖𝑡𝑗), reflecting a deviation at the individual level.

To estimate more complex models, we include the individual and contextual predictors into the baseline

model (1). Following the approach of Fairbrother (2014), we account for both cross-national and

longitudinal effects of macroeconomic performance by decomposing these contextual effects into their

cross-sectional (between-country) and longitudinal (within-country) components. The between-country

component represents the value of a given contextual variable averaged over the entire observed period

(e.g., the average GDP growth rate between 2001 and 2014). The parameter for this component indicates

the cross-sectional relationship between this macroeconomic variable and the level of trust in national

parliament. The longitudinal component, in contrast, represents the deviation of the observed value of

the macroeconomic variable at a specific time point from the country’s average value over the entire

period under observation. In practice, we simultaneously include the country means i.e. time-invariant

component of contextual variables (GDP growth rate, unemployment rate, and control of corruption),

and the mean-differenced i.e. time-varying component of these three indicators in the model (see also

Schmidt-Catran, 2014; Schmidt-Catran and Fairbrother, 2015). Because our hypotheses examine the

effects of macroeconomic variables on subsequent changes in political trust, we lag the macro-level

variables. Specifically, we combine the contextual information of two years to refer to a specific point

of time (e.g., the average unemployment rate of 2001 and 2002 is taken to predict political trust in the

2002 survey wave). The advantage of such multilevel models over the analysis of pooled time-series

cross-section data is that, in addition to estimating both longitudinal (within-) and cross-sectional

(between-) effects, we can also control for compositional effects at the individual level and for the time

trend. The continuous predictor variables at the individual level (education and age) are grand-mean

centered prior to the analysis. Because they are grand-mean centered rather than group-mean centered

(see Raudenbush and Bryk 2002), the averages for these independent variables can differ across groups,

and compositional effects are controlled for.

To address the item non-response, listwise deletion was applied to the records with missing values,

except for the political self-positioning variable, for which we created a separate category for missing

values (see above). The number of missing values was lower than 5% on average and ranged between

11

0.02% for the minority variable and 2.85% for the trust in national parliament variable. Thus, applying

listwise deletion is unlikely to introduce bias into our results (see also Schafer and Graham, 2002).

All models were estimated in SAS 9.4 using the MIXED procedure with restricted maximum likelihood

and robust standard errors. All the analyses were weighted using the ESS design weight to account for

the sampling designs in various countries.

6. Results

Descriptive results: Evolution of trust in national parliaments, 2002-2014

We begin our empirical analysis by examining trends in the evolution of public trust in domestic

parliaments over the period 2002 to 2014. Figure 1 shows considerable differences between countries

in their levels of trust in national parliaments. On a scale from 0 to 10, the average trust in national

parliament ranges from as low as 1.87 in Bulgaria in 2008 to as high as 6.49 in Denmark in 2008. These

cross-country differences tend to follow the regional patterns. In Northern Europe, for example, we

observe the highest level of political trust. The Nordic countries mostly score higher than 5, which is

the midpoint of the scale. In contrast, Eastern and Southern European countries mostly score below 5.

The countries of Western Europe score somewhat in the middle. In the context of cross-national

differences, this configuration of a low level of trust in national parliaments in Southern, Central and

Eastern Europe and a high level of trust in Northern and Western European countries is aligned with the

previous research findings (Listhaug and Wiberg, 1995; Dogan, 2005; Van de Walle et al., 2008).

Regarding longitudinal trends, most European countries have experienced some decline in trust in

national parliaments particularly over the period of the economic crisis (2008-2010) (Figure 1). The

declining trends are especially prominent in the countries that were most severely affected by the crisis

such as Cyprus, Greece, Portugal, and Spain. Notably, whereas trust in national parliaments in a number

of countries of Southern and Eastern Europe appears to follow a continuous declining trend, trust levels

in Nordic and Western European countries appear to ultimately recover to the pre-crisis levels. A

noticeable exception is Iceland, which experienced a considerable drop in trust in national parliament

from 5.92 in 2004 to 4.21 in 2012 without visible recovery over the observation period.

Taken together, these descriptive findings suggest a decreasing trend in trust in national parliaments and

appear to support the association between the worsening of macroeconomic conditions and declining

trust in political institutions. In countries where the impact of the economic crisis was more pronounced

(Iceland, Ireland, Greece, Portugal, Spain), this decline in public trust is considerable. At the same time,

mere descriptive analyses cannot serve as strong evidence of the actual linkage between national

macroeconomic performance and the decline in trust in national parliaments. Therefore, in the next

section we turn to the results of the estimation of the multilevel models.

12

INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE

Results of multilevel models

To test the explanatory power of our hypotheses, we estimate a sequence of three-level models with

random effects at the individual, country-period, and country level. The results of the estimation for the

time effects, individual-level variables, macro-level effects and variance components are given in Table

1. First, the results of the null model (not presented) indicate that there is a significant variation at all

three levels of the empty model. The calculated intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) suggests that

16.8% of the total variation in trust in national parliament is located at the country-level and 4% at the

country-period level. In other words, about 20.8% of the total variance in the sample is not located at

the individual level. Although the variance at the country-period level is small compared to the total

variance, it is significant and therefore needs to be accounted for (Schmidt-Catran, 2014). Considering

that the dataset offers only 5.6 waves for an average country, there is more variation between countries

than within countries over time.

In the following step, we include the linear effect of time as a predictor into the baseline model. The

results of the estimation indicate that for trust in national parliament the linear time effect is negative

and significant (Model 1). This finding confirms that, on average across European countries, trust in

domestic parliaments has decreased during the period 2002-2014. This result is in line with the literature

reporting a general declining trend in public trust in national parliaments and domestic political

institutions (Pharr et al., 2000, Pharr and Putnam, 2000; Dalton, 2004; Bovens and Wille, 2008, Van de

Walle et al., 2008; Hendriks, 2009). In addition, the random effect for time included in Model 2 is also

found to be significant. The significant random slope for the time effect indicates that there is significant

variation between countries in their longitudinal trends in trust. In other words, in some countries trust

in domestic parliaments has decreased, in others it has increased, while yet in other countries, the level

of trust has remained stable. To confirm that the general linear time trend provides a good description

of the data for the period under investigation, we have also tested a model that included a dummy

variable for the year 2010. In 2010, a number of countries introduced austerity measures in order to

counteract the effects of the economic crisis. The dummy for 2010 would account for any additional

change in political trust that might have taken place in 2010 beyond the linear time trend. The dummy

coefficient for the year 2010 was found to be insignificant, confirming that the general linear time trend

provides an adequate description of the data. We therefore excluded the dummy variable for the year

13

2010 from further analyses.4 The quadratic effect of time was likewise found to be insignificant.

In Model 3, we include individual-level predictors and controls along with a dummy variable for former

communist countries. Most of the individual variables are significant, which is not surprising given the

established relevance of these characteristics in the theoretical literature and a large sample size at the

individual level. Consistent with Hypothesis 1, respondents with lower socioeconomic status (as

determined by years of education and subjective income) appear to be more distrustful of national

parliaments. Regarding employment status, respondents in most of the occupational categories are less

trustful of national parliament than the individuals occupying a white collar position. Two exceptions to

this pattern are individuals in education and those in the higher service class jobs. Next, in line with

previous research (e.g. Van der Meer and Hakhverdian, 2017), we find that religious respondents are

more trustful of national parliaments. The area of residency (urban vs. rural) appears to be significant in

influencing the level of trust in national parliament, suggesting that respondents who live in the urban

environment are more trustful of national parliaments compared to the rural residents. Moreover, we

note a very small but significant quadratic effect of age. Furthermore, we find that female respondents

are less trustful of national parliaments than male respondents (for similar results, see Van der Meer,

2010; Van der Meer and Hakhverdian, 2017). Right-oriented respondents are significantly more likely

to exhibit higher levels of trust in national parliament (see also Torcal, 2014: Van Erkel and Van der

Meer, 2016. Interestingly, minorities tend to bestow more trust upon domestic parliaments. While, at

first, this result may appear counterintuitive, this result is consistent with prior findings on trust among

migrants (Michelson, 2003; Maxwell, 2010; Strömblad and Adman, 2010; Röder and Mühlau, 2012;

Heath et al., 2013, Van der Meer and Hakhverdian, 2017) and is often explained by the tendency of

immigrants to provide a more positive evaluation of the political institutions in their host countries than

of those in their country of origin. Finally, the dummy variable for former communist countries is

likewise significant confirming that countries with a communist legacy tend to have lower levels of trust

in their domestic parliaments (for similar findings see Van der Meer, 2010; Van der Meer and Dekker,

2011; Závecz, 2017).

INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

Effects of macroeconomic performance indicators

4 As a further robustness check, we tested a model that included dummy variables for the survey waves 2002-2014.

The resulting time trend is negative and largely monotonic (with two exceptions), which supports our notion that

linear time trend provides an adequate description of the time trend in our sample.

14

In addition to the predictors at the individual level,5 Model 4 includes two indicators of macroeconomic

context, namely the real GDP growth rate and the unemployment rate. As discussed in the modeling

part of the paper, these indicators are introduced into the model in two forms: as a cross-sectional or

time-invariant component and as a longitudinal or time-varying component. This strategy allows us to

estimate between-country and within-country effects of macroeconomic performance on political trust.

The results of Model 4 (Table 1) clearly indicate that the longitudinal component of growth rate and the

longitudinal component of unemployment rate significantly influence trust in national parliament. In

other words, when GDP growth rate is falling or when unemployment rate is rising, trust in national

parliament tends to decline. These findings confirm Hypothesis 3, which stipulates that longitudinal

changes in macroeconomic performance are related to the changes in trust in national parliament.

Specifically, a decrease in real GDP growth rate or an increase in the unemployment rate of one

percentage point reflects a decrease in trust in domestic parliament of 0.047 and 0.048 points,

respectively. While seemingly small, these effects represent substantial changes. For example, between

2003 and 2012, Greece experienced an increase in the unemployment rate of 15.03 percentage points.

This change in the unemployment rate can lead to the decline in trust in national parliament by 0.72, as

predicted by Model 4, which constitutes a considerable decrease. It should be emphasized that these

effects refer to the longitudinal influences of macroeconomic performance. In other words, they reflect

the effect of macroeconomic characteristics on trust in national parliament within countries at a specific

point of time, while controlling for cross-sectional effects of these two macroeconomic variables and

for compositional effects.

A somewhat different picture emerges when we only consider the between-country effects of

macroeconomic variables. While the between-country effect of the unemployment rate is found to be

significant, in the case of the GDP growth rate, the between-effect is insignificant. This result suggests

that the relationship between this latter macroeconomic indicator and trust in national parliaments does

not hold cross-sectionally providing partial evidence against Hypothesis 2. However, as previously

argued, the between-country effects are more susceptible to the influence of confounding variables, and

it is the within-country (longitudinal) effects, instead, that should be given more weight in the

interpretation.

Altogether, the individual and macroeconomic indicators in Model 4 lead to the reduction in variance

of 5.9% at the individual level, of 57.7% at the country-period level, and of 68.7% at the country level,

compared to Model 1. The fact that more than half of the longitudinal variation is explained highlights

the effectiveness of Model 4 in clarifying why in some periods trust in national parliaments is higher

while in other periods, it is lower.

5 Given that the individual parameters have not changed substantially we omit them from further discussion in the

subsequent models with contextual effects.

15

To assess the robustness of our findings, we include macroeconomic variables and the control of

corruption variable along with the individual characteristics into our final model (Model 5). With the

inclusion of the control of corruption indicator, the longitudinal effects of the economic growth and of

the unemployment rate remain significant. This result provides evidence against Hypothesis 4 and

supports the robustness of our findings about the influence of changes in macroeconomic context on

changes in trust in national parliaments. The between-country effects of both macroeconomic variables

are now insignificant but, as mentioned previously, this discrepancy provides support to our argument

that cross-sectional effects are subject to unobserved heterogeneity and should be considered along with

the within-effects for a more accurate interpretation. At the same time, both cross-sectional and

longitudinal effects of the control of corruption indicator are strong and significant, which supports

earlier findings about the effect of corruption on political trust (e.g. Anderson and Tverdova, 2003;

Morris and Klesner, 2010; Hakverdian and Mayne, 2012; Van der Meer, 2010). The final model, Model

5, reduces between-country variance by 83.3% compared to Model 1.

7. Discussion and Conclusion

The present study has responded to a general call in political trust research to supplement the existing

cross-sectional evidence for the causal relevance of macro-level factors with longitudinal designs (Van

der Meer, 2017). Concretely, we analyzed seven waves of the ESS (2002-2014) by means of multilevel

models that disentangle the cross-sectional and longitudinal effects of contextual variables on trust in

national parliaments. The results of this study have implications that are important for theory building

and empirical research on political trust.

More specifically, the current study provides support for the notion that it is important to distinguish

between within-country and between-country effects and its results serve as an important stepping stone

to resolve a growing controversy in the literature regarding the influence of macroeconomic variables

on trust in political institutions. Various studies have reached opposite conclusions about the effects of

macroeconomic performance, but, as the present work demonstrates, these results might reflect

differences in research design. Our findings suggest that the cross-sectional effects of macroeconomic

indicators on political trust that are repeatedly reported in the literature cannot be generalized in a

straightforward manner to longitudinal developments. As such, there is a need to carefully disentangle

between- and within-country relationships. Both types of effects can be reconciled in a single framework

if one uses the design that allows for simultaneous modeling of the between-and within-country effects.

By testing and interpreting longitudinal effects, we can shed new light on the causal relationship between

trust in national parliaments and macroeconomic performance. While the between-effects are more

vulnerable to confounding variables and do not offer insight into the temporal order, the within-effects

provide a more robust test of causality. In other words, if there exists a causal relationship between

16

macroeconomic characteristics and political trust then the changes in these characteristics are expected

to lead to visible changes in trust in political institutions over time.

In the present study, we find no consistent significant cross-sectional relationship between

macroeconomic variables, on the one hand, and trust in national parliaments on the other. However, we

do find strong longitudinal effects of economic growth and unemployment rate on political trust, even

when controlling for the individual effects and corruption. This result is consistent with the previous

findings indicating the significant effects of within-country changes in economic performance on

political trust (Van Erkel and Van der Meer, 2016). That the within-country effects are significant but

not the between-country effects, points in the direction of the presence of confounding factors at the

country level. This result illustrates our argument that that differences in trust between countries and

between time points can be driven by distinct mechanisms, and can therefore show diverging

relationships with other variables. Just what these confounding macro-level factors are should be

considered in future studies. In our view, looking at criteria related to the welfare performance of

countries, such as, for example, the extent of welfare provision or quality of public services, could

provide promising insights.

The divergence between within-country and between-country macroeconomic effects in their influence

on political trust may not be solely due to methodological factors but may also require further theoretical

probing. Specifically, it may be that citizens evaluate the national economy by comparing its

performance historically over time (within-country effects) rather than using other countries’

macroeconomic performance (between-country effects) as a benchmark (Van Erkel and Van der Meer,

2016; Van der Meer, 2017). In such a case, cross-sectional and longitudinal effects can also be expected

to differ, depending on a point of reference for the evaluation. This theoretical avenue needs to be

explored more thoroughly in future research. Our findings also generate additional insights by

examining macroeconomic and corruption effects simultaneously within the same model. Contrary to a

number of studies employing cross-sectional design, we find evidence that the effect of macroeconomic

variables does not disappear after we include the control of corruption measure into the model. Instead

all three within-country effects are found to be significant. This result suggests that corruption and

macroeconomic performance should be viewed as complementary rather than competing explanations

for the differences in political trust. Exactly how they complement each other should be the subject of

future research.

In conclusion, the results of this study provide evidence of the importance of macroeconomic factors for

determining trust in national parliaments. Furthermore, we believe that a more dynamic perspective

focusing on both cross-sectional and longitudinal effects of macroeconomic performance has the

potential to contribute to the development of a more comprehensive account of the relationship between

contextual factors and political trust in institutions.

17

References

Allison, P. D. (2009). Fixed effects regression models (Vol. 160). SAGE publications.

Anderson, C. D. (2009). Institutional change, economic conditions and confidence in government:

Evidence from Belgium. Acta Politica, 44(1), 28-49.

Anderson, C. J. and Tverdova, Y. V. (2003). Corruption, political allegiances, and attitudes toward

government in contemporary democracies. American Journal of Political Science, 47(1), 91-109.

Armingeon, K., and Guthmann, K. (2014). Democracy in crisis? The declining support for national

democracy in European countries, 2007–2011. European Journal of Political Research, 53(3), 423-442.

Bell, A., and Jones, K. (2015). Explaining fixed effects: Random effects modeling of time-series cross sectional and panel data. Political Science Research and Methods, 3(01), 133-153.

Bohara, A. K., Mitchell, N. J., and Mittendorff, C. F. (2004). Compound Democracy and the Control of

Corruption: A Cross‐Country Investigation. Policy Studies Journal, 32(4), 481-499.

Bovens M. and Wille A. (2008) Deciphering the Dutch drop: Ten explanations for decreasing political

trust in the Netherlands. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 74 (2): 283-305.

Citrin, J. and Green, D.P., Presidential leadership and the resurgence of trust in government, Br. J. Polit.

Sci.16(4), 1986, 431-453.

Clarke, H. D., Dutt, N., and Kornberg, A. (1993). The political economy of attitudes toward polity and

society in Western European democracies. The Journal of Politics, 55(04), 998-1021.

Curran, P. J., and Bauer, D. J. (2011). The disaggregation of within-person and between-person effects

in longitudinal models of change. Annual review of psychology, 62, 583-619.

Cusack, T. R. (1999). The shaping of popular satisfaction with government and regime performance in

Germany. British Journal of Political Science, 29(4), 641-672.

Dalton, R. (2004). Democratic challenges, democratic choices: The erosion of political support in

advanced industrial democracies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Della Porta, D. (2000). Social capital, beliefs in government, and political corruption. In S.J. Pharr and

R.D. Putnam (Eds), Disaffected democracies: What’s troubling the trilateral countries?, 202-228.

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Dogan, M. (2005). Erosion of confidence in thirty European democracies. Comparative Sociology, 4(1),

11-54.

18

Dolan, C. J., Frendreis, J., and Tatalovich, R. (2009). A presidential economic scorecard: performance

and perception. PS: Political Science & Politics, 42(4), 689-694.

Easton, D. (1965). A systems analysis of political life. New York: Wiley.

Ellinas, A., and Lamprianou, I. (2014). Political trust in extremis. Comparative Politics, 46(2), 231-250.

Fairbrother, Malcolm. (2014). “Two Multilevel Modeling Techniques for Analyzing Comparative

Longitudinal Survey Datasets.” Political Science Research and Methods, 2(1):119-40.

Freitag, M., and Bühlmann, M. (2009). Crafting trust: The role of political institutions in a comparative

perspective. Comparative Political Studies, 42(12), 1537-1566.

Hakhverdian, A., and Mayne, Q. (2012). Institutional trust, education, and corruption: A micro-macro

interactive approach. The Journal of Politics, 74(03), 739-750.

Heath, A. F., Fisher, S. D., Rosenblatt, G., Sanders, D., and Sobolewska, M. (2013). The political

integration of ethnic minorities in Britain. OUP Oxford.

Hendriks, F. (2009). Contextualizing the Dutch drop in political trust: connecting underlying factors.

International Review of Administrative Sciences, 75(3), 473-491.

Hetherington, M. J. (1998). The political relevance of political trust. American political science review,

92(4), 791-808.

Hetherington, M. J., and Rudolph, T. J. (2008). Priming, performance, and the dynamics of political

trust. The Journal of Politics, 70(2), 498-512.

Hout, M., Brooks, C., and Manza, J. (1995). The democratic class struggle in the United States, 1948 1992. American sociological review, 805-828.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., and Mastruzzi, M. (2011). The worldwide governance indicators:

methodology and analytical issues. Hague Journal on the Rule of Law, 3(2), 220-246

Keele, L. (2007). Social capital and the dynamics of trust in government. American Journal of Political

Science, 51(2), 241-254.

Kumlin, S., and Haugsgjerd, A. (2017). In The Welfare State and Political Trust Bringing Performance

Back In. In S. Zmerli and T. Van der Meer (Eds), Handbook on Political Trust (pp. 285-301).

Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar.

Kumlin, S., and Rothstein, B. (2005). Making and breaking social capital: The impact of welfare-state

institutions. Comparative political studies, 38(4), 339-365.

19

Levi, M., and Stoker, L. (2000). Political trust and trustworthiness. Annual Review of Political Science,

3(1), 475-507.

Lewis-Beck, M. S., and Stegmaier, M. (2000). Economic determinants of electoral outcomes. Annual

Review of Political Science, 3(1), 183-219.

Lipset S.M. (1960). Political man: The social basis of modern politics. Garden City, New York:

Doubleday.

Listhaug, O., and Ringdal, K. (2008). Trust in political institutions. In H. Ervasti et al. (Eds.) Nordic

social attitudes in a European perspective (pp. 131-151). Edward Elgar Publishing.

Listhaug, O., and Wiberg, M. (1995). Confidence in political and private institutions. In H.-D.

Klingemann and D. Fuchs (Eds), Citizens and the State (pp. 298-322). New York: Oxford University

Press.

Marien, S. (2011). Measuring political trust across time and space. In S. Zmerli and M Hooghe (Eds),

Political Trust: Why Context Matters (pp. 13-45). Colchester, England: ECPR Press.

Maxwell, R. (2010). Evaluating migrant integration: political attitudes across generations in Europe.

International Migration Review, 44(1), 25-52.

Meuleman, B., Davidov, E., and Billiet, J. (2017). Modeling Multiple-country Repeated Cross-sections.

A Societal Growth Curve Model for Studying the Effect of the Economic Crisis on Perceived Ethnic

Threat. Methods, Data, Analyses. DOI: 10.12758/mda.2017.10.

Michelson, M. R. (2003). The corrosive effect of acculturation: How Mexican Americans lose political

trust. Social Science Quarterly, 84(4), 918-933.

Miller, A., and Listhaug, O. (1999). Political Performance and Institutional Trust. In P. Norris (Ed.),

Critical citizens: Global support for democratic governance (pp. 204-216). Oxford: Oxford University

Press.

Mishler, W., and Rose, R. (2001). What are the origins of political trust? Testing institutional and

cultural theories in post-communist societies. Comparative political studies, 34(1), 30-62.

Morris, S. D., and Klesner, J. L. (2010). Corruption and trust: Theoretical considerations and evidence

from Mexico. Comparative Political Studies, 43(10), 1258-1285.

Newton, K. (1999). Social and political trust in established democracies. In P. Norris (Ed.), Critical

citizens: Global support for democratic governance (pp. 169-187). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Newton, K. (2001). Trust, social capital, civil society, and democracy. International Political Science

Review, 22(2), 201-214.

20

Offe, C. (1984). Contradictions of the Welfare State. London: Hutchinson.

Oskarsson, S. (2010). Generalized trust and political support: A cross-national investigation. Acta

Politica, 45(4), 423-443.

Pharr, S. J., and Putnam, R. D. (Eds.). (2000). Disaffected democracies: What's troubling the trilateral

countries?. Princeton University Press.

Pharr, S. J., Putnam, R. D., and Dalton, R. J. (2000). A quarter-century of declining confidence. Journal

of Democracy, 11(2), 5-25.

Polavieja, J. (2013). Economic crisis, political legitimacy, and social cohesion. In D. Gallie (Ed.),

Economic crisis, quality of work and social integration: The European experience (pp. 256-278).

Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Poznyak, D., Meuleman, B., Abts, K., and Bishop, G. F. (2014). Trust in American government:

Longitudinal measurement equivalence in the ANES, 1964–2008. Social indicators research, 118(2),

741-758.

Raudenbush, S. W., and Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data

Analysis Methods. Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Rahn, W. M., and Rudolph, T. J. (2005). A tale of political trust in American cities. Public Opinion

Quarterly, 69(4), 530-560.

Röder, A., and Mühlau, P. (2012). Low Expectations or Different Evaluations: What Explains

Immigrants' High Levels of Trust in Host-Country Institutions?. Journal of Ethnic and Migration

Studies, 38(5), 777-792.

Rohwer, A. (2009). Measuring corruption: a comparison between the Transparency International’s

Corruption Perceptions Index and the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators. CESifo DICE

Report, 7(3), 42-52.

Schafer, J. L., and Graham, J. W. (2002). Missing data: our view of the state of the art. Psychological

methods, 7(2), 147.

Schmidt-Catran, A. (2014). Economic inequality and public demand for redistribution: combining cross sectional and longitudinal evidence. Socio-Economic Review, 14(1), 119-140.

Schmidt-Catran, A., and Fairbrother, M. (2015). The random effects in multilevel models: Getting them

wrong and getting them right. European Sociological Review, 32(1), 23-38.

Schunck, R. (2013). Within and between estimates in random-effects models: Advantages and

drawbacks of correlated random effects and hybrid models. Stata Journal, 13(1), 65-76.

21

Strömblad, P., and Adman, P. (2010). From naïve newcomers to critical citizens? Exploring political

trust among immigrants in Scandinavia, In B Bengtsson, P. Strömblad and A-H Bay (Eds.) Diversity,

Inclusion and Citizenship in Scandinavia (pp. 345-370). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

Taylor, M. A. (2000). Channeling frustrations: institutions, economic fluctuations, and political

behavior. European Journal of Political Research, 38(1), 95-134.

Torcal, M. (2014). The Decline of Political Trust in Spain and Portugal Economic Performance or

Political Responsiveness. American Behavioral Scientist, 58(12).

Uslaner, E. (2017). Political trust, corruption, and inequality. In S. Zmerli and T. Van der Meer (Eds),

Handbook on Political Trust (pp. 302-315). Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar.

Van de Walle, S., Van Roosbroek, S., and Bouckaert, G. (2008). Trust in the public sector: is there any

evidence for a long-term decline? International Review of Administrative Sciences, 74(1), 47-64.

Van der Meer, T. (2010). In what we trust? A multi-level study into trust in parliament as an evaluation

of state characteristics. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 76(3), 517-536.

Van der Meer, T. (2017). Democratic input, macroeconomic output and political trust. In S. Zmerli and

T. Van der Meer (Eds), Handbook on Political Trust (pp. 270-284). Cheltenham, England: Edward

Elgar.

Van der Meer, T., and Dekker, P. (2011). Trustworthy states, trusting citizens? A multilevel study into

objective and subjective determinants of political trust. In S. Zmerli and M Hooghe (Eds), Political

Trust: Why Context Matters (pp. 95-116). Colchester, England: ECPR Press.

Van der Meer, T., and Hakhverdian, A. (2017). Political Trust as the Evaluation of Process and

Performance: A Cross-National Study of 42 European Countries. Political Studies, 65(1), 81-102.

Van Erkel, P., and Van der Meer, W. (2016). Macroeconomic performance, political trust and the Great

Recession: A multilevel analysis of the effects of within-country fluctuations in macroeconomic

performance on political trust in 15 EU countries. European Journal of Political Research, 55(1), 177 197.

Van Oorschot, W., and Arts, W. (2005). The social capital of European welfare states: the crowding out

hypothesis revisited. Journal of European social policy, 15(1), 5-26.

Závecz, G. (2017). Post-communist societies of Central and Eastern Europe. In S. Zmerli and T. Van

der Meer (Eds), Handbook on Political Trust (pp. 440-457). Cheltenham, England: Edward

Elgar. Handbook on Political Trust.

Zmerli, S., and Van Der Meer, T. (Eds). (2017). Handbook on Political Trust. Cheltenham, England:

Edward Elgar.

22

Funding

This research contributed to the Rebuilding an Inclusive, Value-based Europe of Solidarity and Trust

through Social Investments (Re-InVEST) project, funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020

research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 649447.

23

Figure 1. Evolution of trust in National Parliament in 28 countries grouped by region, 2002-2014

Note: The y-axis indicates average score in trust in National Parliament measured on 0-10 scale.

24

Table 1. Multilevel regression results. The dependent variable is “trust in national parliament”

Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Coef. SE Intercept 4.3753*** 0.1982 4.3442*** 0.2050 3.2464*** 0.2249 3.9964*** 0.3573 1.9230** 0.5170

Time trend -0.0762* 0.0326 -0.1093* 0.0402 -0.1087** 0.0368 -0.0579* 0.0272 -0.0328 0.0250 (1) Individual predictors Age 0.0017 0.0013 0.0017 0.0013 0.0017 0.0013 Age squared 0.0002*** 0.0000 0.0002*** 0.0000 0.0002*** 0.0000 Gender female (ref. cat) male 0.2155*** 0.0272 0.2155*** 0.0272 0.2155*** 0.0272 Education 0.0445*** 0.0066 0.0447*** 0.0066 0.0445*** 0.0067 Subjective income 0.3313*** 0.0227 0.3311*** 0.0227 0.3310*** 0.0227 Employment status white collar (ref.cat)

self-employed -0.2476*** 0.0276 -0.2475*** 0.0275 -0.2474*** 0.0276 higher service class

0.1490*** 0.0207 0.1491*** 0.0207 0.1491*** 0.0207

blue collar -0.3317*** 0.0380 -0.3318*** 0.0380 -0.3318*** 0.0380 unemployed -0.2772*** 0.0467 -0.2766*** 0.0467 -0.2768*** 0.0467 retired -0.2487*** 0.0365 -0.2486*** 0.0365 -0.2487*** 0.0365 in education 0.3431*** 0.0358 0.3434*** 0.0358 0.3432*** 0.0358 doing housework

-0.1410*** 0.0296 -0.1409*** 0.0296 -0.1410*** 0.0296

disabled -0.4883*** 0.0704 -0.4885 *** 0.0705 -0.4886*** 0.0705 other -0.1758* 0.0695 -0.1758* 0.0695 -0.1756* 0.0694

Urbanization 0.0278* 0.0135 0.0276* 0.0135 0.0279* 0.0135 Left-right placement left (ref. cat.) centre -0.1766*** 0.0415 -0.1766*** 0.0415 -0.1766*** 0.0415 right 0.2125*** 0.0624 0.2126*** 0.0624 0.2126*** 0.0624 missing -0.5263*** 0.0487 -0.5263*** 0.0487 -0.5263*** 0.0487 Religiosity

0.0967*** 0.0065 0.0967*** 0.0064 0.0967*** 0.0064

25

Minority member of majority (ref. cat.)

member of minority

0.2842** 0.0863 0.2839** 0.0864 0.2839** 0.0864

(2) Contextual predictors Former communist regime -1.3590*** 0.2705 -1.1927*** 0.3327 0.0151 0.3823

GDP growth – crosssectional

0.1162 0.1200 -0.0434 0.1097

GDP growth – longitudinal

0.0475** 0.0169 0.0406** 0.0166

Unemployment rate – cross-sectional

-0.1322*** 0.0342 -0.0246 0.0338

Unemployment rate – longitudinal

-0.0485** 0.0155 -0.0423** 0.0155

Corruption – crosssectional

0.9545*** 0.1778

Corruption – longitudinal

0.8699* 0.3634

Variance components (1) Variance country intercept

1.0854*** 0.3097 1.1809*** 0.3344 0.4860*** 0.1437 0.3395*** 0.1042 0.1811** 0.06026

(2) Variance slope time

0.0356** 0.0142 0.0284** 0.011 0.0180* 0.0081 0.0134* 0.0065

(3) Variance country-year intercept

0.2433*** 0.0311 0.1330*** 0.0201 0.1205*** 0.018 0.1028*** 0.0157 0.1009*** 0.0154

(4) Residual variance 5.2595*** 0.0142 5.2595*** 0.0142 4.9550*** 0.0134 4.9550*** 0.0134 4.9550*** 0.0134 Deviance 1252984 1236783 1236764 1236743 * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001, N country = 28.