See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333348641

Social distance and ideological congruence between MPs and citizens

Chapter · May 2019

DOI: 10.4324/9781351065221-6

CITATIONS 3

READS 276

2 authors:

André Freire

Iscte – University Institute of Lisbon

190 PUBLICATIONS   2,616 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Xavier Coller

National University of Distance Education

97 PUBLICATIONS   955 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by André Freire on 15 May 2023.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Iberian Legislatures in Comparative Perspective

This comprehensive book analyses the development of the legislatures in the Iberian countries over the past 40 years, since democracy was introduced, to comparatively understand their role in these political systems and in sustaining their democratic systems. Sharing many historical developments and institutional characteristics, Spain and Portugal also present crucial differences, notably Spain’s pure parliamentary system, a King as Head of State and a quasi-federal structure, and Portugal’s semi-presidential democracy. Starting with a historical and institutional contextualization of these two legislatures, the book examines the most important organizational and behavioural features of legislative life in Iberian legislatures in a comparative perspective. It also shows how new legislatures develop resilience capacity to support lasting democratic systems as full-fledged institutionalized bodies. This book will be of key interest to scholars and students of Spain and Portugal, legislative politics and parliamentarianism, and more broadly to European politics and comparative politics, journalists and practitioners.

Jorge M. Fernandes is a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Institute of Social Sciences, University of Lisbon, Portugal. His work has appeared, among others, in Comparative Political Studies, European Journal of Political ­Research, Legislative Studies Quarterly, and Party Politics. His research interests are representation, legislatures, political parties, electoral parties, and Portuguese politics. He has been a Visiting Scholar at the Center for European Studies, Harvard University and at UC San Diego.

Cristina Leston-Bandeira is a Professor of Politics at the University of Leeds, UK. She has worked on parliaments for over 20 years and is a key scholar on the Portuguese Parliament. She is Co-Director of the Centre for ­Democratic Engagement and the Chair of the UK Study of Parliament Group. She is also co-editor of the journal Parliamentary Affairs and a Constitution Unit Fellow.

Library of Legislative Studies Series Editor: Lord Philip Norton of Louth, University of Hull, UK

Post-Communist Parliaments Change and stability in the second decade Edited by David M. Olson and Gabriella Ilonszki

Parliaments and Citizens Edited by Cristina Leston-Bandeira

Legislatures of Small States A Comparative Study Edited by Nicholas D. J. Baldwin

Parliamentary Communication in EU Affairs Connecting with the Electorate? Edited by Katrin Auel and Tapio Raunio

Government-Opposition in Southern European Countries during the Economic Crisis Great Recession, Great Cooperation? Edited by Elisabetta De Giorgi and Catherine Moury

The Legislature of Brazil An Analysis of Its Policy-making and Public Engagement Roles Edited by Cristiane Brum Bernardes, Cristina Leston-Bandeira and Ricardo de João Braga

Regional Parliaments Effective Actors in EU Policy-Making? Edited by Gabriele Abels and Anna-Lena Hogenauer

The Iberian Legislatures in Comparative Perspective Edited by Jorge M. Fernandes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

For more information about this series, please visit https://www.routledge. com/Libraryof-Legislative-Studies/book-series/LLS

The Iberian Legislatures in Comparative Perspective

Edited by Jorge M. Fernandes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

First published 2019 by Routledge 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN

and by Routledge 52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2019 selection and editorial matter, Jorge M. Fernandes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira; individual chapters, the contributors

The right of Jorge M. Fernandes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira to be identified as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN: 978-1-138-47967-8 (hbk) ISBN: 978-1-351-06522-1 (ebk)

Typeset in Times New Roman by codeMantra

List of figures ix List of tables xi List of contributors xiii Acknowledgements xxi

1 Introduction 1

Jorge M. Fernandes

Section I Historical background 5

2 The Portuguese Assembleia da República in context 7

Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

3 The Spanish parliament in context 25

Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

Section II Internal organisation structures 47

4 Parliamentary party groups in the Iberian democracies 49

Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

5 Committee systems in Portugal and Spain 71

Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

Contents

vi  Contents

Section III Representation and actors 89

6 Social distance and ideological congruence between MPs and citizens: Iberian Legislatures before and after the Great Recession 91

André Freire and Xavier Coller

7 The diversity gap in the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments: descriptive representation through an intersectional perspective 111

Ana Espírito-Santo, Tània Verge and  Laura Morales

8 Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments 130

Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

9 Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation 149

José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

Section IV Legislative processes 165

10 The legislative role of Iberian parliaments 167

Cláudia Ribeiro, Mercedes Araújo and Sónia Rodrigues

11 Parliamentary accountability 187

Manuel Sánchez de Dios

Section V Relations with other bodies 203

12 The participation of the Spanish and the Portuguese parliaments in the activity of the European Union 205

Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

13 The relationship between regional and national parliaments in Spain and Portugal 223

Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

Contents  vii

14 Constitutional Courts and national Parliaments in Spain and Portugal 241

Nuno Garoupa, Joan Solanes Mullor and  Teresa Violante

15 Conclusion 257

Jorge M. Fernandes

Index 263

4.1 Party finance from national PPGs (both chambers) in Spain 60 4.2 Number of staff per PPG in Portugal, 1995–2016 63 6.1 Ideological congruence between voters and MPs in Portugal, before and after the crisis 102 6.2 Ideological congruence between voters and MPs in Spain, before and after the crisis 105 9.1 Trust in the national parliament in Portugal, Spain and the EU, 2001–2017 153 10.1 Average time to approve laws in the Portuguese Parliament 180 13.1 Usefulness of interaction between regional-national MPs, according to regional MPs’ different representation activities 237

List of figures

3.1 Election results, Congress of Deputies, Spain, 1977–2016 33 3.2 Governments and government status, Spain, 1977–2018 38 4.1 Parliamentary party groups in the Spanish lower chamber (N = 350) 52 4.2 Parliamentary party groups in the Portuguese chamber (N = 230 since 1991) 54 5.1 Committee organization and resources in Iberian legislatures 78 6.1 MPs and population socio-demographic profiles (%) 97 6.2 Index of Social Disproportion (ISD) for Spain and Portugal 99 6.3 Synthetic Index of Social Disproportion in Spain and Portugal 101 6.4 Party-voters Congruence (many-to-many) before and after the 2008 economic crisis, Portugal 101 6.5 Party-voters congruence (many-to-many) before and after the 2008 economic crisis, Spain 104 7.1 First MPs from each of the underrepresented social groups 116 7.2 Female MPs by political party, number and percentage 118 7.3 MPs by age cohort and gender, numbers and percentage 118 7.4 Average age of MPs by political party (Portugal and Spain) 119 7.5 MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by gender, number and percentage 120 7.6 MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by political party, number and percentage, Portugal 122 7.7 MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by political party, number and percentage, Spain 122 8.1 Channels of interaction between interest groups and parliament 136 8.2 Interest groups participation in parliamentary hearings, Portugal (2005–2015) 138 8.3 Interest groups participation in parliamentary hearings, Spain (2005–2015) 139 9.1 Who do MPs represent? 156 10.1 Number of bills presented and approved in the 12th legislature (2015–2018), Portugal 172

List of tables

xii  List of tables

10.2 Legislative Production in Portugal’s first 20 years of democracy (1976–1996) 174 10.3 Legislative production in Portugal’s last 20 years of democracy (1997–2017) 175 10.4 Legislative production in Spain’s first 20 years of democracy (1978–1998) 176 10.5 Legislative production in Spain’s last 19 years of democracy (1999–2017) 177 10.6 Proposals initiated and passed in the Portuguese Parliament (1976–2017) 178 10.7 Proposals initiated and passed in the Spanish Parliament (1978–2017) 179 10.8 Parliamentary Appreciations in Portugal (1997–2017) 181 11.1 Parliamentary accountability in Portugal (2011–2015) 190 11.2 Number of accountability procedures held per session (1985–2015) 193 11.3 Parliamentary accountability in Spain (2011–2015) 195 11.4 Number of accountability procedures held per session, Spain (1982–2015) 198 13.1 Congruence of ideological position in each party according to its voters in 17 regions, Spain 232 13.2 Multi-level previous political experience of national and regional MPs (2015 and 2016 national and regional elections) 234 13.3 Frequency of regional MPs’ conversations (meetings/ telephone) with national authorities 236

Elviro Aranda Álvarez (PhD in law, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 1996) is the author of 5 monographs and more than 60 articles and a co-­author of collective works, as well as PI in two competitive public financing projects and a researcher in several others. He has been a national and international speaker at numerous conferences and an expert adviser in constitutional, parliamentary and electoral law. Aranda had several ­research stays in foreign universities. His research interests include parliamentary law, international cooperation and security and social rights, among others.

Mercedes Araújo is the Deputy Secretary General for Administrative ­Affairs of the Spanish parliament.

Ana Maria Belchior is an assistant professor, with aggregation, in the Department of Political Science and Public Policies at ISCTE-IUL (Instituto Universitário de Lisboa) in Lisbon, and a researcher at CIES-IUL. She has been involved in research on several projects related to the themes of democracy and globalization, political participation, democratic representation, political congruence and electoral pledges and ­decision-making. She has published her findings in books and book chapters and in diverse ­national and international journals (e.g. Comparative Political Studies, ­International Political Science Review, Party Politics, Comparative ­European Politics, Journal of Contemporary European Studies, South European ­Society and Politics or The Journal of Legislative Studies).

Xavier Coller is a journalist and sociologist and holds a PhD in Sociology (Yale University). He has taught in several universities in Europe and the US and has been a visiting fellow at Warwick University (UK), University of California (Berkeley), Yale, Harvard, Princeton Georgetown, ­Université de Montpellier 1 and LUISS. He is the Seventh Prince of Asturias Chair, Georgetown University (2005–07) and a full professor of sociology at the Universidad Pablo de Olavide (Seville, Spain). He has authored over hundred works on social theories, research methods, collective identities, political elites and complex organizations (parties, multinationals).

List of contributors

xiv  List of contributors

Ana Espírito-Santo (PhD, European University Institute, Florence, 2011) is an assistant professor at ISCTE-IUL (Lisbon University Institute) and a researcher at the Centre for Sociological Studies and Research (CIESIUL, Lisbon, Portugal). Her main current research interests are gender and politics, political representation and comparative politics. Her work has been published in West European Politics, European Journal of Women’s Studies, Government & Opposition, Electoral Studies and Party Politics.

Jorge M. Fernandes  is a post-doctoral fellow at the Institute of Social Sciences, University of Lisbon. Fernandes holds a PhD in Political and Social Sciences from the European University Institute, Florence. ­Previously, he worked at the University of ­Bamberg, ­Germany, on the political representation of citizens of immigrant origin. His research interests are representation, legislatures, political parties, electoral systems, coalitions, and Portuguese politics. In 2018–2019, Fernandes was a Visiting Scholar at Harvard University’s Minda de Gunzburg Center for ­European Studies. His work has appeared in Comparative Political Studies, European Journal of Political Research, Legislative Studies Quarterly and Party Politics, among others. Together with Hanna Bäck and Marc Debus, he is editing a forthcoming volume on The Politics of Legislative Debate (Oxford University Press).

Bonnie N. Field  is Professor of Global Studies at Bentley University in Massachusetts, USA. Her research interests centre on minority governments, parliamentary regimes, interparty politics in parliament, intraparty processes of candidate selection, and regime democratization. She is the author of Why Minority Governments Work: Multilevel Territorial Politics in Spain (2016), and editor of Politics and Society in Contemporary Spain (with A. Botti, 2013), Spain’s ‘Second Transition’? The Socialist Government of Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero (2011) and Democracy and Institutional Development: Spain in Comparative Theoretical Perspective (with K. Hamann, 2008). She is a local Affiliate of the Center for European Studies at Harvard University and an affiliated researcher at the Observatory of Coalition Governments in Spain, University of Barcelona.

André Freire  is a full professor in political science and the Head of the

­Doctoral Program in Political Science at ISCTE-IUL (Lisbon University Institute), and a senior researcher at CIES-IUL (Center for Studies and Research in Sociology). Freire’s research interests include left-right ideology (masses and elites), electoral behaviour, political attitudes, political institutions (especially electoral systems), political elites and political representation. Freire has been a coordinator and a researcher in several research projects (national and international) related to those research topics and has published widely on these subjects.

List of contributors  xv

Nuno Garoupa is a professor of law and an Associate Dean for Research and Faculty Development & Faculty Director of Graduate Studies, George Mason University, Antonin Scalia Law School. Previously, he taught at Texas A&M University School of Law (2015–2018), University of Illinois College of Law (2007–2015), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal (2001–2007) and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain ­(1998–2001). He also served as the President of Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos, Lisbon, Portugal (2014–2016). Professor Garoupa received his PhD in economics from the University of York (UK), also holds an LLM from the University of London. He has a long-established research interest in the economics of law and legal institutions and comparative judicial politics. He has been awarded the Spanish Julian Marias Research Prize (2010) and the NSF Award in Law and Social Science (2017) for a conference project on “Facilitating Empirical Studies of Judicial Behavior on Constitutional Courts from a Comparative Perspective.”

Eunice Goes  is an associate professor of politics at the University of

­Richmond. She holds a PhD in Political Science from the LSE (2002). Her areas of expertise are British party politics, British political thought and Britain’s relationship with Europe. Her latest research project is the ­monograph The Labour Party Under Ed Miliband: Trying But Failing to Renew Social Democracy (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2016). This book examines the Labour Party’s response to the 2008 global financial crisis and identifies the factors that explain Ed Miliband’s failure in developing a social democratic programme. Goes contributes to the academic blogs TheConversation.com, LSE Democratic Audit, LSE Politics & Policy, LSE Europp, Political Insight and OpenDemocracy.net.

Caroline Gray is a lecturer in Politics and Spanish at Aston University in Birmingham, UK. She specializes in substate nationalist movements, decentralization and the political consequences of the global financial crisis of 2008, with a particular focus on Spain. She is the author of Nationalist Politics and Regional Financing Systems in the Basque Country and Catalonia (Bilbao: Foral Treasury Doctoral Thesis Collection, 2016) and co-editor, with Richard Gillespie, of Contesting Spain? The dynamics of nationalist movements in Catalonia and the Basque Country (Oxon/ New York: Routledge, 2015). She was awarded her PhD in Politics from the University of Liverpool in 2016, after previously graduating from the University of Oxford with a First-class BA and a Master’s degree in ­Modern Languages.

Carlos Jalali is an associate professor and a coordinator of the Public Policy Institutions Innovation group at the Governance, Competitiveness and Public Policies Research Centre of the University of Aveiro. His research focuses predominantly on Portuguese political institutions, party system, political communication and electoral behaviour, and he has been

xvi  List of contributors

published inter alia in South European Society & Politics, Party Politics, Journal of Political Marketing, Acta Politica and European Journal of Communication.

Cristina Leston-Bandeira is a professor of politics at the University of Leeds in the UK. She has worked on parliaments for over 20 years and is a key scholar on the Portuguese Parliament. She is co-director of the Centre for Democratic Engagement and the Chair of the UK Study of Parliament Group. She is also co-editor of the journal Parliamentary Affairs and a Constitution Unit Fellow. Her research focuses mainly on the relationship between parliaments and citizens, particularly public and digital engagement. She has led research funded by a wide range of funding councils, such as the ESRC, the Leverhulme Trust and the ­British Academy. She is currently part of an AHRC GRCF-funded project on Parliaments and People, led by SOAS. She has published extensively on the Portuguese Parliament, comparative legislatures and the UK Parliament. Her publications include Parliaments and Citizens (2014), the pioneering Exploring Parliament (2018) (with L. Thompson) and The ­Institutional Representation of Parliament (2018- with D. judge, Political Studies).

Marco Lisi is an assistant professor in the Department of Political Studies, Nova University of Lisbon and a researcher at IPRI-Nova. His research interests focus on political parties, electoral behaviour, interest groups and political representation. He published several articles in national and international journals such as International Political Science Review, Comparative European Politics and Party Politics, among others. Currently, he is the principal investigator of the project ‘From Representation to Legitimacy: Political Parties and Interest Groups in Southern Europe’, funded by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology.

Luz Muñoz Marquez is associate professor at the Political Science Department (University of Barcelona). Her research focuses on interest groups politics, advocacy and legal mobilization. Other topics of interest are agenda ­setting and government-opposition dynamics. She is a co-editor of the book Los grupos de interés en España (Tecnos, 2016) and has published her research in West European Politics,, The Journal of Legislative Studies and Interest Groups and Advocacy, among others journals.

Irene Martín is an associate professor in the Department of Political Science and International Relations at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM). Her main lines of research and publications deal with elections, political parties and political culture in Spain in a comparative perspective; Greek politics and young people and politics. Her latest publications include How does the Spanish “crisis generation” relate to politics? In Thijssen, P., Siongers, J., Van Laer, J., Haers, J. & Mels, S. (eds.) Political Engagement of the Young in “Europe: Youth in the Crucible. Routledge (2016), together with G. García-Albacete and J. Lorente.

List of contributors  xvii

Laura Morales  is a professor in political science/comparative politics at Sciences Po, CEE, CNRS (UMR 8239) and an affiliated researcher of Sciences Po, LIEPP. She previously worked at the universities of Leicester, Manchester, Murcia, Complutense and the Autonomous University of Madrid. Her research focuses on the areas of political behaviour, comparative politics, public opinion, political parties and the politics of immigration. She has published Joining Political Organisations, ECPR Press (2009); Political Discussion in Modern Democracies in a Comparative ­Perspective (co-edited with M. Wolf and K. Ikeda), Routledge (2010) and ­Social Capital, Political Participation and Migration in Europe (co-edited with M. Giugni), Palgrave (2011); as well as numerous articles in academic international journals.

Joan Solanes Mullor is a lecturer of constitutional law at Pompeu Fabra University. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the Faculty of Law of Trento University (2015), and he was appointed a visiting scholar at KU Leuven (2013) and a visiting researcher at Harvard Law School (2009). Joan Solanes Mullor received his PhD in law from Pompeu Fabra University (2014) and holds an LLM from Harvard Law School (2009) and a master’s in public law from Pompeu Fabra University (2008). His research focuses on institutional design, separation of powers and public regulation in national legal systems and the European Union. The family name is ‘Solanes Mullor’ and not ‘Mullor’. Therefore, it should come after Jose Santana-Pereira in the order.

Pablo Oñate  is a full professor of political science at the University of

­Valencia. Oñate received his doctoral degree in political science at ­Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. He is the President of the European Confederation of Political Science Associations. He was a visiting researcher at Georgetown University and George Washington University. He has published extensively on Spanish political system, electoral and party ­systems, parliaments, parliamentary elites and representation.

Cláudia Ribeiro is the director of technical support and secretarial services in the Portuguese Parliament (Responsible for legislative process; legal support to parliamentary bodies: President, Bureau, Conference of Leaders, Conference of Parliamentary Committee Chairmen, Members). ­Previously, she was the Head of Department of Parliamentary Committees Office (2005–2009) and Director of the Parliamentary Training ­Centre (2004–2005). She holds a BA in law from the University of ­Lisbon and post-graduate studies in European law, legistics and legal science, Senior Master in Public Administration (CADAP, 2007–2008). She earned a Master’s in Public Policies and Public Management.

Pedro Riera is an assistant professor (with tenure) at the University Carlos III of Madrid. He completed his PhD at the European University Institute (Florence, Italy) in 2013. His main research interests are in the field of

xviii  List of contributors

comparative political institutions with a special focus on the causes and consequences of electoral reforms. His work has been published in, among others, Comparative Political Studies, European Journal of Political Research, West European Politics, Political Behavior and Party Politics.

Sónia Rodrigues holds a master’s degree in law by Nova Law School, Lisbon. He has been a researcher and a member of the Observatory of Portuguese Legislation since 2008, and he was a former advisor of Working Group for Legislative Consolidation, Portuguese Parliament, a guest assistant lecturer at Polytechnic Institute of Leiria (2011–2013) and a jurist of ­Cabinet for Alternative Conflict Resolution (GRAL) of the Ministry of Justice (2009–2011).

Juan Rodríguez-Teruel is an associate professor at the University of Valencia. His research interests are political elites, political parties and decentralization processes. He won the Juan Linz prize for his thesis on Ministers in Democratic Spain: Political Recruitment and Ministerial Career (2011 in Spanish). He is also a co-editor (with L. Vogel) of National Political Elites and the Crisis of European Integration, Country Studies 2007–2014 (special issue in Historical Social Research, 41(4), 2016). His latest contributions are in the South European Politics and Society, Ethnic and Racial Studies, The Politics of Party Leadership (Oxford), Party Primaries in Comparative ­Perspective (Routledge) and Handbook of Political Elites (Palgrave).

Manuel Sánchez de Dios is a professor at the Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociología of the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (SPAIN). He is the director of the doctorate program on political science, administration and international relations. He has specialized in comparative politics and is the author of “Los nuevos enfoques de la ciencia política sobre el Parlamento” in Revista de las Cortes Generales (2017) and, with M.  Wiberg, Questioning in European Parliaments in S. Martin and O. Rozenberg (Eds.): The roles and function of Parliamentary Questions, Routledge (2012).

Paulo Almeida Sande is a senior political advisor to the President of the Portuguese Republic. He is a guest professor of political science at the Catholic University, Lisbon. Between 2004 and 2012, he worked as the Head of the European Parliament Office in Portugal. He holds a BA in law from the University of Lisbon and an MPhil in political science from the Catholic University, Lisbon.

José Santana-Pereira (PhD in Political and Social Sciences, EUI, 2012) is an assistant professor at the Department of Political Science and Public Policy, ISCTE-Lisbon University Institute, and a Researcher at CIES-Lisbon University Institute. His research focuses on media systems, media effects, public opinion, campaigns and voting behaviour. He published several papers and book chapters in peer-reviewed journals such as Journal

List of contributors  xix

of European Public Policy, Electoral Studies, South European Society and Politics, Pole Sud, and Análise Social, as well as in books published by Oxford University Press, Springer and Routledge.

Tània Verge is an associate professor at the Department of Political and

­Social Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain). Her research interests lie in gender and politics, political parties and political representation. Her publications have appeared in Politics & ­Gender, Publius – The Journal of Federalism, Party Politics, West European Politics, Government and Opposition, European Journal of Political Research, Political Research Quarterly, Journal of Women Politics and Policy, and European Journal of Women’s Studies.

Teresa Violante,  MA (Padova), is a lawyer specialized in constitutional law. She is currently working as a research fellow at Goethe University ­Frankfurt and is a visiting research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law (Heidelberg). She has worked as a law clerk for the Portuguese Constitutional Court for over ten years and has published extensively on constitutional law and comparative constitutional law. Her research focuses on the interaction between constitutional courts and legislatures.

We want to thank all contributing authors for making this volume possible. We owe thanks to Philip Norton, Lord Norton of Louth, for supporting this project. We would also like to thank the Institute of Social Sciences of the University of Lisbon for financial support in organizing a workshop on Iberian legislatures in May 2018.

Acknowledgements

This volume deals with legislatures in Iberian countries in a comparative perspective. Spain and Portugal share more than their geographical location as Iberian countries. Indeed, the political and social development of both countries has gone hand-in-hand over the past decades. In the 1970s, after some of the longest rightist dictatorships in Western Europe, Iberian countries transition to democracy heralded the beginning of the third wave of democratisation. After a long and convoluted process of democratic consolidation, in 1986, both countries accessed the European Union. On the same day, a joint ceremony was held in Lisbon and Madrid, where the heads of government sealed the commitment of democratic elites to a path of multiparty liberal democracy. Spain and Portugal underwent tremendous economic, social and political changes in the European Union, benefiting from generous cohesion funds from their European partners. In 2008, both countries fell victim of the worldwide economic meltdown, whose political and economic consequences loom large to this day. For all their similarities, Spanish and Portuguese political systems have crucial differences that matter for the functioning of legislatures. First, Spain has a quasi-federal structure while Portugal has a strongly unitary character. Second, Spain is a pure parliamentary system, whose head of state is the King. Conversely, Portugal is a semi-presidential democracy, where the directly elected president holds critical political powers. Third, reflecting its quasi-federal structure, Spain has a bicameral legislature, as opposed to the Portuguese unicameral chamber. This volume has two main goals: First, to take stock of the most important organisational and behavioural features of legislative life in Iberian legislatures in comparative perspective. Our approach is topic-oriented – that is, we have selected some of the most critical aspects of legislatures and examined them in both countries under a similar theoretical framework. Our understanding of legislative organisation is one where representatives ­(micro-level) are part of internal structures (meso-level), such as parliamentary party groups and committees, operating in an environment where formal and informal rules are overarching constraints (macro-level).

1 Introduction

Jorge M. Fernandes

2  Jorge M. Fernandes

Second, we aim to offer the first-ever comprehensive comparative study of Spanish and Portuguese legislatures to a wide English language audience. Importantly, since the early 2000s, there has been an increase in ­international literature’s attention to legislative studies in Iberian countries. In Spain, Field (2016) contributes to the study of the legislature in making minority governments work. Chaqués and colleagues (2015) examine agenda-setting in the Spanish parliament. Recently, Coller and colleagues (2018) edited a volume on how representatives establish, and perceive, their dyadic relationship with their constituents. Finally, Verge (2010) has published extensively on gender and representation in Spain. Unlike Spain, the Portuguese Assembleia da Republica has yet to receive attention on several topics. Since the 1990s, Leston-Bandeira (2004, 2009) produced seminal works on Portuguese legislative politics. Recent work by Espírito-Santo and colleagues (2018) examined the role of gender in the legislature. Furthermore, Fernandes (2016) and Fernandes and colleagues (2018) examine the internal organisation of committees and the use of parliamentary questions, respectively. Legislative studies in both countries have therefore produced recently important studies; still much remains to be done. This volume hopes to present some of that recent research, whilst moving forward its research agenda.

Plan of the volume

Our volume is divided into five sections. The first section is devoted to the Historical Background of the Spanish and the Portuguese legislatures. In Chapter 2, Goes and Leston-Bandeira make an overview of the development of Portugal’s parliament over the past 40 years. The authors analyse the role of the parliament in the Portuguese political system, as well as the development of political parties and the party system. In Chapter 3, Field and Gray make an appraisal of the Spanish legislature since the 1970s, focusing on asymmetric bicameralism, party dominance and executive dominance. Furthermore, the authors analyse the frequent minority government and recent party system changes in Spain. The second section turns to Legislative Structures. In Chapter 4, Jalali and Teruel examine the internal organisation and functioning of parliamentary party groups. The authors examine how party groups relate with their MPs concerning their financial resources, also analysing how parliamentary party groups relate with extra-parliamentary party organisations and the executive. In Chapter 5, Fernandes and Riera inspect committee systems in Spain and Portugal. The authors explore these legislatures’ committee structures, size, and powers, and how they have changed over the past decades. The third section examines Actors and Representation. In Chapter 6, Freire and Coller use mass and elite surveys to appraise the level of ideological congruence between parliamentarians and their constituents before and

Introduction  3

after the Great Recession. In Chapter 7, Espírito-Santo, Verge and Morales make an intersectional analysis of descriptive representation in Spain and Portugal. The authors look at how gender interacts with age, sexuality, ethnicity and ableness to assess the extent to which legislatures are representative of the population at large. In Chapter 8, Lisi and Muñoz analyse how interest groups use parliamentary channels to influence policy-making, whilst also exploring informal channels of influence and their increasing use. In Chapter 9, Santana-Pereira and Martín use mass surveys to produce an account of citizens’ attitudes towards parliamentary institutions in Spain and Portugal. Specifically, the authors analyse at trust and performance measures to understand diffuse and specific support. Furthermore, they examine citizens’ opinions towards electoral reforms. The fourth section turns to Legislative Processes. In Chapter 10, Ribeiro, Araújo and Rodrigues probe the legislative process, arguably one of the most relevant functions of legislatures. The authors spell out the functioning of the legislative process, highlighting the dominance of the executive in law-making. The chapter offers extensive descriptive statistics on legislative initiatives in Iberian legislatures. In Chapter 11, Sánchez de Dios inspects accountability mechanisms. Specifically, the author looks at how legislative actors use tools of their repertoire to monitor the executive. The author offers an empirical account of the use of parliamentary written questions, question time, indirizzo, debates and so forth. The fifth section deals with Relationships with Other Bodies. In ­Chapter 12, Aranda and Sande analyse the relationships with the European Union. Specifically, the authors consider the role of committees and the Chamber as arenas for EU scrutiny. Moreover, Aranda and Sande examine inter-­parliamentary cooperation and the use of the early warning mechanism processes. In ­Chapter 13, Oñate and Belchior examine the relationship between national and regional parliaments. They show that parliamentary institutions are not efficient vertical integration mechanisms. Instead, Oñate and Belchior suggest that political parties are the best political integration mechanism. In ­Chapter 14, Garoupa, Solanes Mullor and Violante turn to the relationship between the parliament and the Constitutional Court. The authors offer a descriptive account of the role of the legislatures in the process of selection of members of the judicial branch. Furthermore, they examine the structure for litigation and make an empirical assessment of litigation over the past few years.

References

Coller, X., Jaime-Castillo, A. M., and Mota, F. (2018). Political power in Spain.

­London: Palgrave. Fernandes, J. M. (2016). Intra-party delegation in the Portuguese legislature: assigning committee chairs and party coordination positions. The Journal of Legislative Studies, 22(1), 108–128.

4  Jorge M. Fernandes

Fernandes, J. M., Leston-Bandeira, C., and Schwemmer, C. (2018). Election proximity and representation focus in party-constrained environments. Party Politics, 24(6), 674–685. Field, B. N. (2016). Why minority governments work: multilevel territorial politics in Spain. New York: Springer. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2004). From legislation to legitimation: the role of the Portuguese parliament. London: Routledge. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2009). Dissent in a party-based parliament: The Portuguese case. Party Politics, 15(6), 695–713. Verge, T. (2010). Gendering representation in Spain: opportunities and limits of gender quotas. Journal of Women, Politics & Policy, 31(2), 166–190.

Section I Historical background

Introduction

Like most political institutions, the Assembleia da República (AR) is the result of both the agency of the political actors who designed it and a by-product of the political, economic, social and cultural contexts in which it emerged and evolved (Pierson 2004). Over its 40 years of existence, the AR has simultaneously responded to the circumstances of the times that surrounded its birth and growth as a mature representative institution and has set the template for Portugal’s democratic culture and political system. To consider these factors, the overview of the AR proposed in this chapter is divided into two main parts. The first part offers a landscape portrait of the political and economic context which informed the set-up and development of the Portuguese parliament. It therefore first charts the historical context leading to the introduction of the AR and then considers how European integration shaped Portuguese party politics and parliamentary practices. The chapter’s second part zooms in and explains in detail the role of parliament within the Portuguese political system. This section starts by offering an overview of Portugal’s main political institutions and an explanation of how they relate to each other. Given the predominant role of political parties in the AR, this section explains the development of the party system and the relationship between parliament and the executive. The final section of the chapter examines the key changes the AR underwent since 1976, demonstrating that its role has shifted from a predominantly legislative function to a scrutiny role.

Historical context

Before we focus on the development of the AR in the post-1974 democratic regime, it is useful to consider its historical context. Portugal had two experiments with democratic representative institutions before the Carnations’ Revolution of 1974 (during Salazar’s dictatorship there was a National Assembly but this was not a democratic institution). Both experiments, first the constitutional monarchy of 1822–1910 and second the First Republic of

2 The Portuguese Assembleia da República in context

Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

8  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

1910–1926, were characterized by instability, oligarchic political parties and a weak democratic culture. Portugal’s constitutional monarchy of 1822–1910 followed the template of similar regimes of that period: legislative power was exercised by a directly elected Chamber of Deputies; executive power was vested in the figure of the Sovereign and his ministers, with judicial power in the hands of the courts. The Chamber of Deputies was dominated by two parties – the Progressive and the Regenerator – which took turns to lead, being however ideologically indistinct (Sardica 1997: 747; Jalali 2015: 42), as well as oligarchic and clientelistic in their modus operandi (Sardica 1997: 750; Leston-Bandeira 2004; Pinto and Rezola 2007: 353). In effect, parties were non-existent and politicians were driven by their personal agendas. This regime was dominated by what is commonly known as caciquismo, which refers to corrupt locally based networks developed around individual politicians with considerable local power. The reputation of the executive was equally tainted. The state of almost bankruptcy of the Portuguese economy, social unrest and crucially the unpopularity of King Carlos I’s response to the British ultimatum of 18901 ultimately led to the collapse of the Constitutional Monarchy on 5 October 1910. With the establishment of a democratic republic, the third one in Europe, the republican leaders aimed to transform Portugal into a modern Western European democracy. However, the First Republic was affected by the same political and social unrest that had doomed the constitutional monarchy. As Wheeler succinctly put it, ‘with a total of 45 governments, eight general elections and eight presidents in 15 years and eight months, the Portuguese Republic was the most unstable parliamentary regime in Western Europe’ (1978: 865)2. This chronic instability paved the way to the military coup of 1926. Invoking the need for a strong state to ‘regenerate’ the country and save the economy from bankruptcy (Telo, 1994 786), the military took over and ruled until 1933. Then an austere professor of economics named António de ­Oliveira Salazar, who had been Finance Minister since 1929, sidestepped the generals and established the New State (Estado-Novo). The new regime, entrenched in the Constitution of 1933, was led by a President of the Council (head of government),3 included a Corporatist (upper) Chamber which retained a consultative status in a weak, and mainly consultative, National Assembly. In turn, the National Assembly was dominated by the single party, National Union. Finally, there was a President of the Republic who had mostly a ceremonial role. Though not a fascist regime, Salazar’s conservative dictatorship had adopted a ‘certain fascist choreography’ (Pinto and Rezola 2007: 360). ­Italian fascism, in particular its combination of corporatism with ­Catholicism, as well as its sophisticated propaganda and censorship apparatus inspired the New State (Pinto 2008: 31).

Portuguese Assembleia da República  9

Portugal’s New State lasted for a surprisingly long period, but it was not immune to crisis. There were several attempted coups and active, though ultimately weak, opposition groups which plotted to overthrow the regime. But it would be the wars for independence in Portugal’s African colonies, started in 1961, that would pose the greatest threat to the regime’s survival. These wars overstretched the financial and human resources of the state (Hersvik and Larsen 2004: 179) and nurtured discontent in the armed forces (Maxwell 1999: 54–55). After a few unsuccessful attempts, the Movement of the Armed Forces (MFA), which gathered a small group of junior and middle-rank officers, put an end to 48 years of dictatorial rule in Portugal on 25 April 1974. The notoriously peaceful coup was enthusiastically supported by the population, who welcomed the young officers in the streets of Lisbon with red carnations. But if the Carnations’ Revolution marked the beginning of the third wave of democratization worldwide (Huntington 1991: 3), it was not clear then how it would end. Immediately after the coup, the Junta of National Salvation assumed sovereign power, elected a new president from its members and appointed a government. Another revolutionary body, the Council of State, exercised legislative power until the elections of the Constituent Assembly, called for a year after the revolution, the 25 April of 1975. At the time of the coup, political parties were largely absent. Apart from the Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), which operated as an organized albeit clandestine political force during the dictatorial period (Lisi 2008), most parties were created immediately before (the Socialist Party in 1973) or just after the coup of 1974 (the case of the centre-right Social-Democratic Party – PSD – and the conservative CDS). The weak anchorage of political parties in Portuguese society at the time meant that MFA took a leading role in Portuguese politics immediately after the coup (Pinto 2008: 269; Rezola 2008: 12). However, the MFA was weakened by its internal divisions. Apart from nebulous references to the three ‘Ds’ in its manifesto – democratize, decolonize and develop – the MFA could not agree about the aims of the coup (Rezola 2008: 6). In the meantime, the 1975 elections to the Constituent Assembly, which was tasked with drafting the new constitution, went ahead as scheduled. In these elections, the pro-European Socialist Party (PS) was the most voted party, attracting 37.9 per cent of the vote (Leston-Bandeira and Freire 2003: 57). The approval of the new Constitution in 1976, which established a parliamentary democracy within a semi-presidential political system, started the process of democratic consolidation. Two separate elections elected the first President of the Republic, general Ramalho Eanes, and led to the formation of a socialist minority government. However, these elections did not conclude the process of democratic transition. As the 1976 Constitution attributed powers to a military body, the Council of the Revolution, Portuguese

10  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

democracy was compromised (Rezola 2008: 14). It was only when the 1982 constitutional reform abolished this body4 that Portuguese democracy was consolidated (Linz and Stepan 1996: 116).

The Europeanization of Portugal: politics and economics

The path of democratic consolidation and the development of parliament’s role are very closely linked to Portugal’s process of Europeanization. Indeed, Portugal’s two main parties viewed membership of the European Economic Community (EEC) as a condition to the development of a solid representative democracy. The Socialist Party, which had strong links with sister parties in France, Germany and Britain, made membership of the then EEC a key national priority. In the electoral campaign to the AR’s first elections in 1976, the PS chose A Europa Connosco (Europe With Us) as its slogan (Sassoon 1997: 596; Lobo and Magalhães 2001: 27), and in February 1977 the socialist minority government presented its formal application to join the EEC. A month later, Brussels formally started the process of accession which lasted almost a decade (Soares 2007: 462).5 By agreeing to start accession talks with Portugal, the EEC showed that its initial reservations about Portugal’s democratic credentials (Teixeira and Pinto 2017: 21) had disappeared. Portugal’s accession to the EU in 1986 marked the beginning of a new era in foreign policy, which now prioritized Europe over other international commitments. This new understanding, shared by the two parties of government, the PS and the PSD, posited that Portugal could only avoid international and European marginalization by participating fully in the project of European integration. This bipartisan consensus about Europe implied that the two main parties relied on each other’s support in parliament to approve legislation pertaining to the EU. In practice, the new foreign policy consensus implied that both parties agreed that, first, Portugal had to demonstrate competence (which was translated in compliance with EU requirements) and, that, second, Portugal should fully participate in all dimensions of European integration (Gaspar 2000: 361–363; Teixeira and Pinto 2017: 27–28). To that end, Portugal signed the Schengen agreement, was an enthusiastic supporter of EU enlargement, was a founding member of the European Monetary Union (EMU) and took a leading role in the intergovernmental conference which culminated with the signing of the Lisbon Treaty of 2007. But these commitments, especially the decision to be a founding member of EMU, posed considerable challenges to the Portuguese economy. Doubtless, EU membership positively transformed the Portuguese economy. In the period 1994–2000, real GDP growth averaged more than 4 per cent annually, but structural problems, such as low productivity and a low-skilled workforce, meant it was still vulnerable to external shocks (Royo 2010).6

Furthermore, the goal to become a founding member of EMU presented Portugal with difficult challenges. Despite the efforts of António

Portuguese Assembleia da República  11

Guterres’ socialist government, in 1999 Portugal had only nominally met the Maastricht convergence criteria to join EMU. In truth, there was no real ­economic convergence with the rest of Europe (Royo 2010). In this context, it is not surprising that Portugal was amongst the first member states to breach the euro’s convergence criteria. As the public deficit rose to more than 4 per cent of the GDP and inflation reached 3.6 per cent in 2001, ­Portugal was the first Eurozone country to be subject to the EU’s Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP). In the period 2002–2008, successive governments succeeded in temporarily bringing down the deficit to below the required 3 per cent of the GDP, but these periods of fiscal probity tended to be short-lived. In typical fashion, when the socialist government had finally managed to bring the deficit down to 2.2 per cent in 2008, those efforts were quickly eroded by the effects of the global financial crisis. Like other European countries, the government responded to the crisis with anti-cyclical policies which included major investments in public ­infrastructure, research and development, as well as tax rises and ­public-sector reforms. But these measures did not produce the desired effects. At the end of 2009, the public deficit rose to 9.3 per cent of the GDP, and the economy was in recession. At the request of the EU, the Socialist minority government implemented three packages of austerity measures which had a negligible effect over the public deficit. To make matters worse, unemployment rose from below 8 per cent in 2009 to 12 per cent in 2011, the economy shrunk by 9 per cent in the period 2008–2013, and borrowing costs were spiralling out of control. As the opposition parties voted down its fourth package of austerity in the spring of 2011, the government resigned whilst at the same time seeking a loan from the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In exchange for the 78 billion euros loan, Portugal agreed to implement a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) which was implemented with considerable ideological zeal by the ­subsequently appointed centre-right coalition government. As a reward for its exemplary implementation of the MoU, the EU ­announced Portugal’s exit from the bailout programme in 2014, though the country’s fiscal position was far from stabilized. Public deficit was still above 7 per cent, unemployment affected 13.9 per cent of the working ­population (down from the peak of 16.2 per cent reached in 2013) and the severe public spending cuts and tax rises had impacted considerably the purchasing power of the population. By then the long-standing bipartisan consensus7 about Europe had visible cracks. Whilst the PSD saw the bailout as an opportunity to reform the Portuguese economy along monetarist lines and to align Portugal with Germany, the PS, historically the most pro-European party became increasingly aware that the policies associated with the euro were an obstacle to its programmatic goals. Since 2014, the Socialists started to challenge

12  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

Brussels’s pro-austerity line and have demanded reforms to the governance of the EMU with a view to promote greater social cohesion and economic convergence. In these circumstances, it is not surprising that following the inconclusive results of the 2015 parliamentary elections, the minority socialist government, which relied on the support of the radical left parties Left Bloc and PCP-Greens in parliament, changed the direction of macro-economic policy. Instead of pursuing further public spending cuts and privatizations, the government reversed some of the former and froze the latter. As Portugal’s public deficit fell to 2 per cent of the GDP in 2016, Portugal exited the EDP in the spring of 2017 and since then has been hailed a story of great economic success by the EU. Yet, the turning of this economic corner has not rendered Portugal’s immune to crisis. Public debt has remained high and economic convergence with the Eurozone remains a pipedream. Throughout this journey, parliament played a crucial role either by being the site where key decisions pertaining to the EU were taken or where the two main parties orchestrated Portugal’s full participation in European integration.

The role of parliament in Portugal’s political system

The core political institutions

As the previous sections showed, the full democratization of Portugal has been the main goal actively pursued since 1974 through diplomacy, ­economic policy and the development of political institutions. Of all the political institutions established in the 1976 Constitution, the AR was the one where democratic representative principles were most clearly asserted. This would be an institution providing key legitimacy to the new democratic regime, but also one which would learn from the legacy of its past. As such, establishing the new parliament was foremost about ensuring a democratic and representative legitimacy, but also about ensuring a platform for an enduring regime; crucially, one that would not fall foul of its past failures. The key consequences of this would be the placement of parliament at the heart of the new regime, whilst providing for a referee like figure in the President of the Republic, as well as giving considerable power to political parties to ensure the stability of democracy. The constitutional framework established by the 1976 Constitution provides therefore for a triangular organization of political power and legitimacy (Canotilho and Moreira 1991: 213), which is divided between parliament, the president and government. Despite some important amendments, namely in 1982, 1989 and 2004, in its essence the 1976 Constitution still today frames the essentials of the Portuguese political system. As in other European semi-presidential systems, the Portuguese president is directly elected by the people, has veto powers over legislation (it can ask parliament to revise

Portuguese Assembleia da República  13

draft bills considered unconstitutional) and, under certain conditions, can dissolve parliament and dismiss the government. These powers were more loosely used in the first years of democratic rule, particularly in 1978/1979, being restricted in the 1982 revision of the constitution, but have played an important part in Portuguese democracy. It is thanks to these powers, for instance, that recurrent Presidents have asked parliament to consider again key pieces of legislation, such as abortion laws or indeed austerity packages. It was also in use of these powers that in 2004 President Sampaio decided to dissolve parliament and call for new elections, considering that the government was not fulfilling its democratic functions. But if the President acts as a guarantor of the democratic functioning of political institutions, the main accountability relationship takes place between parliament and government, with the latter being politically ­responsible to the AR, enshrining core democratic accountability principles. Due to a separation of powers, which makes members of government separate to members of parliament, the executive does not need to derive directly from parliament’s political forces. But it needs the support from parliament and, in practice, it cannot govern without parliament’s support. This is best expressed through the process of government investiture ­(Leston-Bandeira and Fernandes 2015). New governments are formally invested by the president, but also need parliament’s tacit approval. Although parliament does not have to formally approve the new government, it does have the power to move a motion to reject its programme, which is presented at the investiture moment through a debate of several days in the AR. The AR can also move motions of censure to the government, which, if approved by an absolute majority, lead to the government’s dismissal. This tool was used recurrently in the first decade of democratic rule, leading namely to the dismissal of Cavaco Silva’s first government in 1987. More recently, this has been used mainly as a tool to set the political agenda (Leston-Bandeira and Fernandes 2015). Likewise, governments can ask for parliament’s confidence through an equivalent motion, which reaffirms, or otherwise, their legitimacy to govern. Besides these three core institutions, we should also note the role of the Constitutional Court, as the ultimate guarantor of Portuguese Constitution. Composed of 13 judges, 10 of which elected by parliament (with the remaining co-opted), the Constitutional Court plays an important role as a check on legislation which may be considered unconstitutional. It is independent from the other core political institutions, playing therefore a key role in safeguarding the Constitution. Finally, the last core element in Portugal’s constitutional design is the electoral system used for general elections. Despite constitutional amendments enabling a possible change to the electoral law, the Portuguese parliament has been elected through the same proportional representation d’Hondt system since 1976. The enshrining of the proportionality rule was a fundamental step in ensuring the democratic legitimacy of the new regime.

14  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

By choosing this electoral system, the drafters of the Constitution aimed to prevent the reemergence of the caciquismo phenomenon and disincentivize the cultivation of personal vote (Ware 1995), which had undermined the Constitutional Monarchy and the First Republic, as seen above; it also offset the weak institutionalization of political parties (Jalali 2015: 308). However, a consequence of this choice was, as the literature on electoral systems establishes (Gallagher and Marsh 1988; Carey and Shugart 1995), the centralization of power in the hands of party leaders who are in charge of selecting the individual parliamentary candidates. For those reasons, the Constitution established that the representative mandate is a national one, as set in Art 152b: “Deputies represent the whole of the country and not the districts through which they were elected”. As such, the AR’s 2308 Deputies are elected through closed lists across 22 separate districts – 18 across the continental Portugal, plus two for the autonomous regions of the Azores and Madeira islands, and two for emigrants, outside and within Europe; these districts are mere administrative divisions, they are not equivalent to the Anglo-Saxon conception of a constituency. The electoral system has led to a whole range of different types of electoral results, from minority governments, to absolutely majority ones, to different types of coalitions. This in turn has led to very different types of relationship between parliament and government as the following section shows.

The development of the party system

Since the parliamentary elections of 1976, the Portuguese multiparty system has been stable and predictable (Jalali 2014: 236), with contours largely unchanged. The party system has been defined by the electoral competition between five relevant parties (Sartori 1976: 123) – the PS, the PSD, the CDS-PP, and the anti-system parties PCP and Left Bloc (Freire 2005: 81; Jalali 2014: 237; Lisi 2015). Of these five, the PS and the PSD, typical catch-all parties (Jalali 2015), have been the parties of government since 1976; the CDS has been mostly a coalition partner to the centre-right PSD (though it briefly coalesced with the Socialists in 1978); the anti-system parties PCP and Left Bloc (this party only emerged in 1999) had always refused to join coalitions with the Socialists. But the impact of the 2011 deficit crisis and subsequent bailout agreement with the troika institutions, and perhaps the expectation of demonstrating to the electorate that they were not merely protest parties ­(Dunphy and Bale 2011: 500–501) led to a radical change in the political and electoral strategies of these parties. Following the 2015 parliamentary elections, both the PCP-Greens and the Left Bloc joined a quasi-coalitional arrangement with the PS (Fernandes 2016: 898). One of the remarkable features of the Portuguese party system has been its responsiveness to changing economic circumstances (Lobo 1996). Indeed, a pattern can be observed since the 1976 elections. In periods of economic downturn (1976–87; 2001–2005; 2009–2015), the party system tends towards

Portuguese Assembleia da República  15

greater fragmentation, whilst in periods of economic growth (1987–2001; 2005–2009) the system shows majoritarian tendencies. As explained below, this pattern is shown by the Effective Number of Parliamentary Parties (ENPP) index.9

In the first decade of Portuguese democracy, marked by economic crisis and two IMF interventions as seen above, the party system was fragmented and showed symptoms of ‘polarized pluralism’ (Opello and Claggett 1984: 167). In that period, the ENPP ranged from 3.47 in 1976 reaching the high point of 4.23 at the 1985 elections (at this election the new party PRD became the third largest party in parliament; this party disappeared soon after the 1985 elections). Unsurprisingly, this high level of party fragmentation resulted in either minority governments or coalition governments that never completed their terms (Lobo 2001). In the period 1987–2002, which coincided with a period of unprecedented economic growth, the party system manifested majoritarian tendencies (Lobo 2001: 687; Freire 2005: 86). The ENPP in this period ranged between 2.36 in 1987 and 2.57 in 2002. At the 1987 elections, the PSD managed the rare occurrence in proportional representation electoral systems of winning an absolute majority; an achievement repeated in 1991. Four years later, the PS capitalized on voter fatigue following ten years of PSD governments and won the 1995 election with a comfortable plurality of 43.76 per cent of the vote (four seats short of a majority). As the economy registered the highest rate of growth since democratization, the PS increased slightly its majority to 44.06 per cent in the 1999 elections. However, this government was short-lived. Following the disappointing results obtained at the 2001 local elections, the then Prime Minister António Guterres resigned, and early elections were called for 2002. By then the economy was on the verge of recession and Portugal was found to be in breach of the convergence criteria governing the euro, as seen above. But despite the unpopularity of the socialist government, the PSD failed to win a majority and formed a coalition government with the CDS which did not last its full term. The deteriorating economic circumstances and the turmoil within the leadership of the PSD led President Jorge Sampaio to dissolve parliament in 2004 and call early elections (Neto and Lobo 2009). Voters’ desire for political stability led to the first overall majority of the PS in 2005, however this period of relative stability proved to be a brief interlude. The PS lost its majority in 2009. In truth, none of the two main parties has won an overall majority since then. These results confirm the thesis that voters often punish incumbent parties for their challenging economic circumstances (Bartels 2013: 49; Magalhães 2017: 756). The resulting pattern of party fragmentation at the time of crisis was shown by the ENPP index which rose to 3.13 in 2009, and the only reason why it declined to 2.71 in 2015 was because the PSD and the CDS-PP contested the election in a joint platform (Para a Frente Portugal (PAF) – Portugal Ahead).

16  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

In 2009, the PS led a short-lived minority government which collapsed in 2011 because of the fragile state of public finances. Following the 2011 parliamentary elections, the PSD formed a coalition government with the CDS, which despite the severity of the crisis, lasted its full term. When the 2015 parliamentary elections took place, the recession was officially over, however its effects were still felt by most voters. Consequently, the electorate reacted by denying a majority to the two parties that were blamed for the decline in their living standards (Magalhães 2017). The rightwing platform PAF won a plurality of votes – 36.33 per cent of the vote share – but fell short of a majority of seats in parliament. The Socialists, on the other hand, had very disappointing results, winning only 32.31 per cent. By contrast, the Left Bloc obtained its best result, winning 10.19 per cent of the vote and becoming the third largest party in parliament. The coalition ­PCP-Greens won 8.25 per cent of the vote. So far, so predictable. But, as Fernandes argued, what happened immediately after the 2015 elections can potentially change the pattern of relationships between the relevant parties and therefore bring significant changes to the party system (2016: 898). Instead of seeking a coalition agreement with the centre-right PSD, the PS asked the Left Bloc and the PCP-Greens to support the formation of a socialist minority government. After 35 days of negotiations, the PCP-Greens and the Left Bloc agreed to support the PS. This was a remarkable turn of events that put an end to what the socialist leader António Costa called the Berlin Wall of Portuguese politics and which had prevented any type of dialogue between the different left-wing parties since democratization. Challenging expectations, this arrangement proved to be stable and is highly likely to last its full term. However, it is too early to establish whether this arrangement will leave a permanent mark in the party system. If the pattern that has dominated Portuguese party politics since 1976 endures, the period of economic growth that started in 2016 may well herald the return of majoritarian tendencies to the party system.

The relationship between parliament and government

As the development of the party system makes clear, the role of the AR is fundamentally defined in accordance to its relationship with the government. This encompasses mainly two key roles, the legislative role and the scrutiny role, the salience of which varies according to the type of political support the government enjoys in parliament (Leston-Bandeira 2004). Indeed, the AR becomes the central political institution when the party system is fragmented and no party holds a majority, however the AR is somewhat sidelined when the party of government controls an absolute majority of seats. Comparatively to other legislatures, the AR has considerable legislative powers. It can initiate, amend and reject legislation, regardless of its origins. The Constitution establishes a number of policy areas that can only be legislated through parliament. However, the government also has independent

Portuguese Assembleia da República  17

powers of legislation, being able to issue decrees-law in a variety of policy areas. Although parliament can recall some of these for scrutiny, they represent a considerable portion of the legislation passed. Still, parliament’s reserved areas of policy touch on the fundamentals of policy-making, such as education or defence (CRP, Art. 164), or indeed health and taxation which are “relative reserved” policy areas (CRP, Art. 165), for example, the government may legislate in those areas, as long as it secures a delegation of power from parliament. The Portuguese parliament’s legislative power is illustrated by the fact that Deputies have legislative powers to initiate, amend and/or reject legislation, regardless of whether they are in opposition or in government, and regardless of the size of their parliamentary group. This means that even if the opposition does not have enough support in parliament to pass their own legislation or to amend the government’s proposals, they can nonetheless present their own proposals (projects of law), which are discussed together with government proposed legislation (proposals of law). This is an important agenda setting power, almost non-existent in legislatures such as the UK House of Commons. In practice, however, the AR’s legislative power over the past 40 years has fluctuated according to the size (and type) of government’s political support in parliament. When minority governments are in power, the AR tends to have considerable legislative powers, forcing the executive to negotiate with parliament on a law-by-law basis. This was the case of Cavaco Silva’s 1985 government, Guterres’s 1999 government and Costa’s 2015 government, which only exists thanks to the support of key parliamentary groups. However, in situations of absolute majority, the AR’s legislative role becomes minimal, such as during Cavaco Silva’s 1991 and 1995 governments or Sócrates’s 2005 government. The party composition of each legislature is therefore key to determine how much leeway governments have in shaping their legislation outside the AR. Likewise, its scrutiny role has also varied considerably depending on the size of the government’s majority in parliament. The scrutiny role becomes particularly pressing and active at times of absolute majority government. However, in the 1970s this role was not a priority for the constitutional drafters; at that time parliament’s key role was undoubtedly seen primarily as a legislative one, albeit of course with important accountability responsibilities which could be triggered through motions of no-confidence. As Leston-Bandeira has stated, scrutiny was initially “seen as a guarantee of democracy, rather than a practice of democracy” (2001: 150). It was only when democracy became more established and politics more stable, that scrutiny tools started to expand. Scrutiny as a routine day-to-day check on government would therefore only develop properly from the early 1990s onwards, namely in the form of further opportunities for questioning, more opportunities for debates and stronger roles for committees. The shaping of parliament’s role is also closely linked to its own internal development, as the next section shows.

18  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

The development of the institution

The AR’s modus operandi has changed considerably over its first 40 years of democratic rule. However, one element has remained at its core: the central role of political parties as an antidote to the corruption and instability stemming from the factionalized and individualized politics that characterized earlier parliamentary experiences. Thus, in the mid-1970s political parties emerged as the core unit of political representation tasked with the role of stabilizing the political system. As a result, a number of regulations ensure that still today political parties – in the form of parliamentary groups – are the core unit of representation, controlling much of what happens in parliament. This is ensured, in the first instance, by the Constitution, which establishes that political parties hold the monopoly in candidate selection (CRP, Art. 151), this in turn centralizes power in the hands of party leaders (Magalhães 2011). In addition, Art. 180 of the Constitution specifically ascribes to parliamentary groups a number of rights, such as interpellations (a form of debate). Within parliament, most of the key resources, such as quotas of parliamentary business or budget entitlement, are distributed by parliamentary groups (rather than individual Deputies). Although revisions to the Rules of Procedure (namely in 1993 and in 2007) introduced some rights to independent Deputies, such as time to speak in the Chamber and the identification of specific Deputies in the presentation of bills. Other than some exceptions specifically listed in the Rules of ­Procedure, parliamentary business is therefore organized according to parliamentary groups. This includes most of the parliamentary business, from the time allocated to groups to speak in the Chamber, to the composition of Committees or the entitlement to scrutiny tools. The predominance of parliamentary groups, and within this MPs’ dependence on their parties to be reelected, explains why party discipline is so strong in the Portuguese parliament (Leston-Bandeira 2009). Personifying the importance of the parliamentary groups to the organization of parliamentary business, the Conference of Leaders, which brings together the presidents of all parliamentary groups and the President of the AR, is a key decision-making body within parliament. The other key determinant of parliamentary business is no other than its own rulebook: the Regimento, for example, Rules of Procedure. The Rules of Procedure were absolutely key in 1976 to establish what sort of institution the AR would be and how it would organize its business. In the absence of a democratic parliamentary practice, and despite the existence of staff and representatives with parliamentary experience under dictatorial rule, this regulatory document would be key in shaping the new legislature. Forty years later, the Rules of Procedure remain as important. However, over time they have undergone considerable revisions, namely in 1988, 1993 and 2007. Overall, these revisions have shaped the legislature into a more professional

Portuguese Assembleia da República  19

and efficient institution, but also one more open to the external world; although in absolute terms, the legislature of the 1970s was in many ways far more democratic. This was partly achieved through a rationalization of procedures in 1988, seen at the time as very controversial and restrictive of the rights of the opposition (Leston-Bandeira 2004). After all, the Rules of Procedures set-up in 1976 made clear that their goal was to enshrine a strong democratic legitimacy into the new system. For that reason, the Rules of Procedure were incredibly democratic, providing for strong opposition rights. Indeed, in many ways the opposition had more rights than the government. This is because many of the rights were protected as opposition rights, regardless of the size of the group. This translated, amongst other things, into very long plenary debates. The 1988 revision of the Rules of Procedure put an end to this. From then on, rights would be ascribed according to the size of the parliamentary group – this meant that the larger the group, the more rights it would be entitled to, leading to an emboldening of those groups supporting the government. The 1988 revision rationalized procedures, leading to more streamlined parliamentary processes and activities. Likewise, and again personifying the pursuit of enshrining democratic ideals, the AR in the 1970s was the Chamber (Leston-Bandeira 2004). Most of the parliamentary business focused on the discussion of legislation (the legislative package that would shape the new democratic regime) and most of this happened in the Chamber. Committees were not allowed to meet at the same time, as the Chamber had hardly any resources available to support its work. With successive changes to the Rules of Procedure, taking place over the past 40 years, Committees have become a core part of parliamentary business in the AR, having now their own staffing and having become far more professionalized. What is more, Committees are now a core forum for the scrutiny of government legislation and policies. Connected to this, in terms of professionalization of the institution, it is also worth noting that the job of Deputy has also undergone considerable change over the past 40 years. For instance, in the 1970s, the term of a Deputy could last as little as a single day. The use of substitutions in the list system was not only perfectly normal and accepted, but also regular. For example, 576 substitutions took place within the single year of 1983–1984, from a pool of only 250 Deputies (Leston-Bandeira 2004: 93). Overtime this has been restricted, with now fewer substitutions taking place, leading to a higher professionalization of the job of Deputy. Likewise, if in the early years Deputies had no offices as such (let alone support staff), gradual revisions have introduced offices and strengthened the provision of support staff (though this is still mainly ascribed per parliamentary group, rather than Deputies individually considered). Successive revisions to the Rules of Procedure have also fine-tuned the type of scrutiny tools available to Deputies, with these becoming far more important as democracy became consolidated, as we saw above. If the AR was

20  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

established in the 1970s mainly as a forum to debate legislation, over its subsequent 40 years, other roles would emerge and become as important, such as scrutiny but also its relationship with citizens. The 1993 revision was an important step in this path, later on consolidated through the 2007 reform. In terms of openness to citizens, the AR still has some way to go, comparatively with other parliaments in Europe, but it is noteworthy that there is a far more explicit concern with nurturing the relationship with the public (Leston-Bandeira and Tibúrcio 2013). This is reflected in the development of petitions since 1991, reinforced since 2005 with its online provision and now again more recently, in 2018, with the Digital Parliament Group’s initiatives. It is also manifested in a commitment to open the institution to visitors more regularly and in the development of the Parliament of Young People programme, in place since 1995. In addition, the launch of the internet in 1990s introduced a direct communication channel between voters and Deputies. This is of particular significance in a system such as the Portuguese, where the unit of representation is embedded into the party rather than in the Deputies individually considered. In the months after the 1974 revolution, it was very common to witness long queues to enter the AR to attend the public galleries and follow the ongoing debates. This clear interest dwindled over the years though and both turnout and trust in parliament have declined over the past decades. To revert this tendency, the AR is making a concerted effort to seem more aware of public attitudes and to actively reach out to citizens.

Conclusion

This chapter has shown that, since its establishment in 1976, the AR has been a resilient and highly adaptable institution that has played a key role in Portugal’s democratic life. If in its early years, the architects of the AR wanted above all to avoid adopting the design flaws that had plagued earlier experiences with representative institutions, in the last decade the focus has been in improving the quality of Portugal’s democratic life. After more than 40 years of existence, the Portuguese parliament is now a very active law-maker which has become more professional, transparent and aware of citizens’ expectations as well as more robust in its scrutiny role. The development of the AR was largely decided by political parties. As we saw, in the period of transition to democracy, political parties used their democratic legitimacy in the Constituent Assembly to shape the democratic institutions (including the party system) which would be established in the 1976 Constitution. Henceforth, political parties have guided the evolution of the different political institutions and have shaped parliament’s relationship with the Executive, but they have also determined which policy issues should reach the political agenda. Over the past four decades, a pattern can be discerned in the role the AR performs in Portugal’s political system. The AR becomes the centre of

Portuguese Assembleia da República  21

political life when none of the two main parties controls the majority. In these periods, the party of government tends to consult parliament more often to get its agenda approved. In these periods, the AR has been able to set the rules of the game and to introduce innovations that have strengthened the role of parliament as a rule-setter and scrutinizer. This in turn has consolidated political pluralism as in these circumstances smaller parties and individual deputies acquire greater visibility to agenda-set their issues and to therefore influence the legislative agenda of the government of the day. By contrast, when one of the main parties holds an absolute majority, the AR becomes more peripheral. As party discipline is strong, the party of government tends to consult less with other parties because it is in a position to resist any attempt to constrain its room for manoeuvre. Because legislative approval is guaranteed, parliamentary debates become less important. Nonetheless, the AR has significant legislative powers in comparison with other European legislatures and plays a significant role in Portugal’s political life. In addition, the Portuguese parliament seems attuned to the pressures of public opinion and to the changing practices of other European legislatures and has gradually become a more open and responsive institution. For these reasons it can be argued that the AR has been, since its foundation, the barometer of Portugal’s democratic life.

Notes

1 This ultimatum challenged Portugal’s imperial ambitions in Africa. 2 During this period, 20 ‘revolutions’ 325 ‘terrorist incidents’ and 518 strikes took place (Schmitter 1999: 57). 3 As president of the Council, Salazar was the central figure of the regime. In comparison with fascist leaders such as Franco, Mussolini or Hitler, Salazar was vastly more powerful. Apart from leading the government, he also controlled the finance, foreign affairs and at times the defence briefs. His reach was so strong that the meetings of the council of ministers had only a symbolic nature (Pinto 2001: 1058). 4 Worth noting that the 1974 Programme of the MFA envisaged that military bodies such as the Council of the Revolution would be abolished following the first presidential and legislative elections. 5 Several factors explain the lengthy accession process. First, the European institutions were still concerned with the fragility of Portuguese democracy and had reservations about the significant power that the armed forces still enjoyed. Second, the Portuguese economy was weak, and in serious need of economic modernization. A low-skilled workforce, poor public infrastructure, and an overreliance on the agricultural sector were serious obstacles to economic convergence with the rest of Western Europe. Moreover, public finances were so weak that Portugal was subject to two interventions by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the period 1978–1982. Third, the EEC decided to negotiate Portugal’s accession at the same time as Spain’s. The Portuguese government tried to conduct separate accession talks but Brussels was adamant that the two new Southern democracies would join the EEC at the same time (Teixeira and Pinto 2017: 25).

22  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

6 In reality, the impressive rate of economic growth recorded in the 1990s was partly driven by factors like revenue gained by a vast programme of privatizations and the generous European structural and cohesion funds and regional development funds, which would soon dry out (Royo 2004: 120). 7 Given the strong Europeanization of Portuguese politics, other parties had to develop positions about the EU. Thus, the conservative CDS is historically a pro-European party but it toyed with Euroscepticism in the 1990s (Jalali 2015: 131). The PCP is a Eurosceptic party and defends Portugal’s withdrawal from the EU. The Left Bloc on the other hand articulates what can be defined as a qualified Europeanism. Whilst it subscribes to the cosmopolitan values of the EU and is relatively at ease with transnational governance, it denounces its democratic deficit, challenges its neoliberal policies and has argued for Portugal’s withdrawal from the euro (Freire 2012: 241). 8 Note that the number of Deputies used to be 250 and was reduced to 230 at the start of the 1990s. There have been repeated calls from some parties to reduce it further. 9 The Effective Number of Parliamentary Parties is derived from Laakso and

­Taagepera’s (1979) formula.

References

Bartels, L. (2013) “Political Effects of the Great Recession”, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 650:1, 47–75. Canotilho, J.J.G. and Moreira, V. (1991) Fundamentos da Constituição, Coimbra: Coimbra Editora. Carey, J.M. and Shugart, M.S. (1995) ‘Incentives To Cultivate a Personal Vote: A Rank Ordering of Electoral Formulas’, Electoral Studies, 14:4, 417–439. CRP (Constituição da República Portuguesa) in www.parlamento.pt/Legislacao/ Paginas/ConstituicaoRepublicaPortuguesa.aspx Dunphy, R. and Bale, T. (2011) ‘The Radical Left in Coalition Government: Towards a Comparative Measurement of Success and Failure’, Party Politics, 17:4, 488–504. Fernandes, J.M. (2016) ‘The 2015 Portuguese General Election’, West European

­Politics, 39:4, 890–900. Freire, A. (2005) ‘Party System Change in Portugal, 1974–2005: The role of social, political and ideological factors’, Portuguese Journal of Social Science, 4:2, 81–100. Gallagher, M. and Marsh, M. (1988) Candidate Selection in Comparative Perspective: The Secret Garden on Politics, London: Sage. Gaspar, C. (2000) ‘Portugal e o Alargamento da Uniao Europeia’, Analise Social, XXV:154–155, 327–372. Hersvik, J. and Larsen, S.U. (2004) ‘Democratic Breakdown and Transitions to Democracy in Portugal’, Portuguese Journal of Social Science, 2:3, 165–192. Jalali, C. (2014) ‘For Whom the Bailout Tolls: The Implications of the 2013 Local Elections for the Portuguese Party System’, South European Society and Politics, 19:2, 235–255. Jalali, C. (2015) Partidos e Democracia em Portugal: 1974–2005, Lisboa: Imprensa de Ciências Sociais Laakso, M. and Taagepera, R. (1979) ‘“Effective” Number of Parties: A Measure with application to Western Europe’, Comparative Political Studies, 12:1, 3–27. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2001) ‘The Portuguese Parliament During the First Two Decades of Democracy’, West European Politics, 24:1, 137–156.

Portuguese Assembleia da República  23

Leston-Bandeira, C. (2004) From Legislation to Legitimation: The Role of the Portuguese Parliament, London: Routledge. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2009) ‘Dissent in a Party Based Parliament: the Portuguese Case’, Party Politics, 15:6, 695–713. Leston-Bandeira, C. and Fernandes, J.M. (2015) ‘Parliamentary Investiture Rules in Portugal’s Semi-presidential Democracy’, in B.E. Rasch, S. Martin, and J-A. Cheibub (eds.), Parliaments and Government Formation, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 217–232. Leston-Bandeira, C. and Tibúrcio, T. (2013) ‘Developing Links Despite the Parties – Parliament and Citizens in Portugal’, in C. Leston-Bandeira (ed.), Parliaments and Citizens, London: Routledge, 120–138. Linz, J.J. and Stepan, A. (1996) Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America and Post-communist Europe, Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins University Press. Lisi, M. (2008) ‘Rethinking the Role of the Portuguese Communist Party in the Transition to Democracy’, Portuguese Journal of Social Science, 7:1, 17–35. Lobo, M.C. (1996) ‘A Evolução do Sistema de Partidos À Luz de Desenvolvimentos Políticos e Económicos (1976–1991)’, Análise Social, 31:139, 1085–1116. Lobo, M.C. (2001) ‘The Role of Political Parties in Portuguese Democratic Consolidation’, Party Politics, 7:5, 643–653. Lobo, M.C. and Magalhães, P. (2001) “Europe and the Portuguese Socialists

­(1975–1999)’, Journal of Southern Europe and the Balkans, 3:1, 25–35. Magalhães, P.C. (2017) ‘A Tale of Two Elections: Information, Motivated Reasoning, and the Economy in the 2011 and 2015 Portuguese Elections’, Análise Social, 52:225, 736–758. Maxwell, K. (1999) A Construção da Democracia Portuguesa, Lisbon: Editorial Presença. Neto, O.A. and Lobo, M.C. (2009) ‘Portugal’s Semi-Presidentialism (Re)considered: An Assessment of the Role of the President in the Policy-Making Process ­(1976–2006)’, European Journal of Political Research, 48:2, 234–255. Opello, W. and Claggett, W. (1984) ‘The Dynamics of West European Party Systems: The Portuguese Case’, Polity, 17: 1, 165–178. Pierson, P. (2004) Politics in Time: History, Institutions, and Social Analysis, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Pinto, A.C. (2001). ‘Settling Accounts with the Past in a Troubled Transition to Democracy: The Portuguese Case’, in Alexandra Barahona de Brito, Carmen ­Gonzalez-Enriquez and Paloma Aguilar (eds.), The Politics of Memory: Transitional Justice in Democratizing Societies, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 65–91. Pinto, A.C. (2008) ‘The Legacy of the Authoritarian Past in Portugal’s Democratisation, 1974–6’, Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions, 9:2–3, 265–291. Pinto, A.C. and Rezola, M.I. (2007) ‘Political Catholicism, Crisis of Democracy and Salazar’s New State’, Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions, 8:2, 353–368. Rezola, M.I. (2008) ‘The Military, 25 April and the Portuguese Transition to Democracy’, Portuguese Journal of Social Science, 7:1, 3–16. Royo, S. (2004) ’From Authoritarianism to the European Union: The Europeanization of Portugal’, Mediterranean Quarterly, 15, 95–129. Royo, S. (2010) ’Portugal and Spain in the EU: Paths of Economic Divergence (2000–2007)’, Análise Social, 45:195, 209–254.

24  Eunice Goes and Cristina Leston-Bandeira

Sardica, J. (1997) ‘A Vida Partidária nos Primeiros Anos da Regeneração’, Análise Social, 32:143–144, 747–777. Sartori, G. (1976) Parties and Party Systems: A Framework for Analysis, Vol. I.

­Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sassoon, D. (1997) One Hundred Years of Socialism: The West European Left in the Twentieth Century, London: Fontana Press. Schmitter, P.C. (1999) Portugal: do autoritarismo à democracia. Lisboa: Imprensa de Ciências Sociais. Soares, A.G. (2007) ‘20 Years of Portugal in the EU’, Perspectives on European Politics and Society, 8:4, 460–475. Teixeira, N.S. and Pinto, A.C. (2017) A Europeização da Democracia Portuguesa, Lisbon: Imprensa de Ciencias Sociais. Ware, A. (1995) Political Parties and Party Systems, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Wheeler, D. (1978) ‘A Primeira República Portuguesa e a História’, Análise Social, 14:56, 865–872.

Introduction

Spain’s transition to democracy followed Francisco Franco’s death in 1975. It has traditionally been hailed as a highly successful example of a top-down democratisation process that King Juan Carlos I, Franco’s chosen successor (Gunther 1992), spearheaded. In this elite-centred account, the monarch led the transition to democracy rather than continuing the dictatorship, working together with Prime Minister Adolfo Suárez and a select group of key reformist political actors. This top-down transition contrasts with the ­revolutionary nature of the Portuguese transition. Nonetheless, recent scholarship draws attention to the significant role of civil society in pushing reform forward (Radcliff 2011; Threlfall 2008). Re-democratisation led to the installation of a parliamentary regime, in which government is responsible to parliament, with positive parliamentarism (Bergman 1993). This means that parliament must affirmatively select the government in a formal vote, called an investiture vote. The regime also has a constitutional monarch as the head of state, initially King Juan Carlos I until he abdicated in 2014. Currently, his son, King Felipe VI, reigns. This chapter examines the context in which Spain’s parliament, the Cortes Generales, has developed since the transition to democracy. It is Spain’s second democratic regime (and therefore parliament) following its first experience with mass democracy during the Second Republic in the 1930s, and in many ways that experience shaped the current regime. The parliament also developed in the context of Spain’s ascension to the European Union, which the overwhelming majority of Spanish society embraced, and generally positive economic performance, until the more recent economic crisis that began in 2009. Considering its place in the political system, parliament, and particularly the lower house Congress of Deputies, is clearly the central representative institution. Nonetheless, an institutionally powerful executive constrains parliament’s power, and devolution and Europeanisation disperse policy-making authority. While parliament’s institutional features have ­remained fairly constant over the democratic period, changes in the party system and alternation between minority and majority cabinets affect parliament’s power in practice.

3 The Spanish parliament in context

Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

26  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

The historical context and re-democratisation

In Spain, liberal parliamentarism dates, first, to the constitution of 1812 (Marcuello and Pérez Ledesma 1996). However, prior to the current regime, Spain’s only proper experience of democracy had been the short-lived Second Republic of 1931–1939, a coup against which led to a brutal civil war (1936–1939) and a longstanding fascist-tinged dictatorship (1939–1977). Spain’s Second Republic implemented negative parliamentarism, meaning that parliament did not formally vote to select the government (Bergman 1993). Instead, the president of the Republic selected the prime minister, and, on the latter’s instructions, the government ministers. Once in office, the government was responsible to parliament. The government was presumed to have the confidence of parliament unless or until it formally withdrew it (Vintró Castells 2007: 236). Unlike Spain’s current democracy, the Second Republic ceded significant powers to the head of state, including appointing the prime minister and making the government separately responsible to the president. It was also an unusual, hybrid regime which was neither fully parliamentary nor semi-presidential (Álvarez Tardío 2004). The constitution stipulated that parliament would elect the first president, but subsequently the president would be elected by parliament and by electors, equal in number to the members of parliament, who are popularly elected. In practice, this only occurred once before the regime was defeated in a civil war. The 1931 Constitution afforded legislative power to a single chamber, the Congress of Deputies. Historically, Spain had also had an upper house, the Senate, which dated back to 1834. Spain’s legislature first became bicameral under the royal statute of that year, following which the lower and upper houses were officially designated as the Congress of Deputies and the Senate in the 1837 constitution. The Senate was initially royally appointed and later remade as an elected chamber under the Restoration period (1875–1923), before its suppression, along with the Congress of Deputies, following the coup of Miguel Primo de Rivera in 1923. The Senate would not be restored until the creation of the bicameral legislature in 1977 during the constituent period following Franco’s death. During the Second Republic, the party system was highly fragmented, and political parties were weak and divided (Juliá 1995). Governments were unstable, multiparty coalitions, amounting to 17 between the approval of the constitution in December 1931 and 18 July 1936 (Vintró Castells 2007: 240). On 18 July, a coup against the young regime led to a brutal civil war, and, by 1939, the authoritarian regime of General Francisco Franco. During the Franco regime (1939–1977), Spain’s faux parliament, las Cortes Españolas, was an undemocratic, corporatist institution that the executive controlled, rather than the reverse. It was inspired in part by the shortlived assembly (Asamblea Nacional Consultiva) that the Primo de Rivera dictatorship had set up between 1927 and 1929 (Giménez Martínez 2012).

The Spanish parliament in context  27

The Francoist parliament was nonetheless significant in Spain’s transition to democracy. Under the leadership of its president—the reformist softliner Torcuato Fernández-Miranda—it approved the Law for Political Reform in November 1976 that was the blueprint for the transition, thereby committing [political] suicide, in the words of Francoist hardliner José Antonio Girón de Velasco.1

The challenge for the monarch and the politicians leading the transition to democracy was to strike a balance between reform and continuity so that the fundamental bases of democratic institutions, as laid out and approved in the 1978 constitution,2 could be accepted by a wide range of political forces from Franco’s heirs on the right through to the communists (Colomer 1998). The transition was negotiated with authoritarian elements still intact, and it was agreed to “let bygones be bygones”, meaning that crimes ­Francoists committed went unpunished and unrecognised (Aguilar 2002). This situation did not gradually start to be reversed until the Historical Memory Law approved decades later in 2007, under then Prime Minister Zapatero, though it has been criticised as not having gone far enough. Greatly influenced by their perceptions of Spain’s political history, transition political leaders also weighed issues of democratic representation along with political stability. Parliament was established as the institution that represented the Spanish people, and was and is the only national institution that is directly elected.3 However, transition leaders’ concern with political stability led them to adopt a variety of institutions that they anticipated would strengthen governments, as discussed below.

Europeanisation and economic transformation

One of the key priorities of Spain’s political elites at the time of the transition was to pave the way for Spain to enter the then European Economic Community (EEC). Following the failure of Franco’s economic model of autarchy in the earlier decades of his dictatorship, the regime had belatedly tried to join the EEC but was rebuffed. It only managed to achieve a preferential trade agreement in 1970, which was very limited (Martínez Chacón 2009). After winning Spain’s first democratic elections in 1977, Suárez, leader of the centrist Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD) that governed Spain from 1977 to 1982, relaunched the country’s accession bid. After eventually being admitted to the EEC in 1986 (alongside Portugal), Spain went on to become one of the founding members of the Eurozone in 1999. Until recent years, EEC/EU membership had not been a controversial aspect of parliamentary politics (Palau, Muñoz Márquez, and Chaqués-­ Bonafont 2014). For example, in 2008, the Congress of Deputies ratified the Lisbon Treaty with 322 votes in favour, six against and 2 abstentions. The Senate ratified it with 232 votes in favour, 6 against and 2 abstentions (Kölling and Molina 2015: 362).

28  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

The Partido Socialista Obrero Español (PSOE) and the Partido Popular (PP) alike have always been strongly in favour of EU membership and integration, sharing an ambition for Spain to play a leading role in the EU and supporting the project of an ever-closer Union. When first in power from 1982 to 1996 under Felipe González, the PSOE quickly shifted towards a classically liberal economic agenda in supporting privatisation to modernise the Spanish economy and allow for its successful European integration (Chari 1998). Indeed, with both the PP and the PSOE sharing quite a lot in common on the economic front (Royo 2009), studies have shown that the main drivers of left-right party competition and voting patterns in parliament have tended to be other more divisive issues. These include territorial decentralisation, immigration and the state-Church relationship ­(Sánchez-Cuenca and Dinas 2012). For a long time, the common economic agenda paid off. Spain benefited hugely from EU structural and cohesion funds to develop public infrastructure, while the euro brought immediate economic benefits by lowering interest rates. This helped fuel Spain’s construction boom that brought high growth for a decade until the bubble burst. This all contributed to Spain’s gradual economic convergence with other EU member states over the first 20 years of its membership: Spanish GDP per capita rose from 71.6 per cent of the EU-15 average in 1985 to 91.1 per cent in 2005 (100 per cent of the EU-28). Over that period, average GDP in the EU-15 only increased at a faster pace than Spain’s during the 1992–1994 recession, which hit Spain harder than others (Real Instituto Elcano 2006). For society, the overwhelming consensus was therefore not surprisingly in favour of the EU, which many associated with political progress and economic modernisation. Only since the global financial crisis of 2008 have some real signs of dissatisfaction with the EU project begun to emerge, albeit still to a lesser degree than in many other member states. For a long time, no far-right Eurosceptic party had any degree of success in Spain (Alonso and Rovira Kaltwasser 2015). Spain’s historically higher-than-average levels of support for European integration help explain this (González-Enríquez 2017). Moreover, Euroscepticism has so far not been a strong feature of Vox, the far-right challenger that did eventually secure a significant number of seats for the first time at the Andalusian regional elections in late 2018, thereby becoming crucial to government formation. It is more focused on domestic issues such as the Catalan independence crisis. Some dissatisfaction with the EU has come from representatives and supporters of the new left, encapsulated by Podemos and its political allies at municipal and regional levels. While not against the concept of the EU itself, they are critical of its current form, which they see as an elite-driven capitalist and neoliberal project, especially in light of the strict austerity agenda that core EU political elites imposed from 2009 on debt-stricken Southern Eurozone members.4 Moreover, they reject the fact the both the PSOE and the PP in practice supported this agenda by combining forces in 2011 to change the constitution to cap Spain’s structural deficit allowance.

The Spanish parliament in context  29

This was an attempt to reassure the international markets about Spain’s commitment to budgetary stability. But, the unpopularity of the measure, coming in the wake of the unprecedented mobilisation of the anti-austerity movement known as the 15-M, contributed to the rising dissatisfaction with Spain’s traditional parties. In Europe, Spain was among the hardest hit by the global financial crisis since the economic liberalisation process over previous decades had resulted in an economy that was excessively dependent on construction and property and on domestic household consumption (Salmon 2017). Spain’s problem started as one of high private debt held by companies and households, but once the property bubble collapsed and the economy began to struggle, the public debt rate also soared, eventually reaching the 100 per cent mark in 2014.5 Since then, Spain’s debt levels have stabilised at around 98–99 per cent of GDP—far above the European Commission’s 60 per cent recommendation. Despite the depth of the recession, Spain’s economy managed to return to growth in 2014. It then exceeded growth rates of 3 per cent of GDP in 2015, 2016 and 2017, far higher than the EU average. This expansion, however, has primarily been fuelled by low-productivity sectors such as tourism. Historic problems such as insufficient R&D spending persist, limiting the development of a more knowledge-based economy to fill the gap left by construction. Moreover, while unemployment has been reducing, many of the new contracts are poorly paid and precarious. The economy’s return to growth has not helped to reduce rates of inequality, poverty and social exclusion, which are among the highest in the EU (European Commission 2017; OECD 2016). Numerous legacies of the crisis thus persist, impacting parliamentary activity and dynamics.

Parliament in Spain’s political system

The main task of Spain’s first elected parliament in 1977 was to design the new constitution. The political system established was one in which parliament was central but a strong executive, an active constitutional court, political decentralisation and European integration circumscribed its power. In addition to its constituent nature, the 1977–1979 bicameral parliament was in many ways distinct from the ones that followed it. First, the monarch appointed 41 senators, alongside the 207 that voters directly elected and the fully elected Congress of Deputies. Second, the Senate was a more equal chamber to the lower house, Congress of Deputies, than it would be under the 1978 constitution. For example, both chambers had to approve the constitution. Third, in 1977, the king had the authority to appoint the prime minister, Adolfo Suárez; parliament had no role in selecting the government. This is significant because Suárez’s party did not have a majority of seats in parliament. Finally, a high degree of interparty consensus characterised decision-making in parliament (Capo Giol 1990; Field 2005), which, in part, is why Spain’s transition is characterised as a pacted or negotiated one (Gunther 1992).

30  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

Between 1979 and today, very similar rules have structured the parliament’s activities. The 1978 constitution established a bicameral parliament, with political power strongly tilted towards the Congress of Deputies. Most significantly, it is the Congress of Deputies (and not the Senate) that elects and can bring down governments. And it is the Congress of Deputies that is the central legislative actor. The Senate is a review chamber that can amend and veto legislation; however, the Congress of Deputies can, with a majority vote, reject them. The electoral system for the Congress of Deputies was designed to assure representation for the political right in the new political system and to limit party system fragmentation, which had existed during the Second Republic. Therefore, Spain uses a system of proportional representation (PR) that greatly compromises proportionality. This is because, on average, district magnitude (the number of seats allocated per district) is low (6.7),6 and each district is guaranteed a minimum of two seats, regardless of its population. In practice, this has favoured the two largest parties, the UCD and PSOE between 1977 and 1982, and the PSOE and AP/PP, subsequently. It has typically not punished (and at times benefited) regionally based parties that only present candidates in a limited territory and concentrate their votes geographically. The electoral system has also led to the underrepresentation of smaller parties whose support is spread across the Spanish territory, such as the United Left (previously the Spanish Communist Party). The closedlist PR system also encourages party-centred legislative behaviour, and discourages personalistic behaviour, discussed below. The Senate, in contrast, is primarily elected using a limited vote system in provincial districts (typically a smaller territorial unit than the autonomous community). The regional parliaments also indirectly elect about 1/5 of the senators. Because of the more majoritarian nature of the electoral system for the Senate, it has often reinforced the position of the larger parties. The electoral system also limits the Senate’s ability to act as a chamber of territorial representation, as does its comparatively weak powers. Unlike in Portugal, Spain’s 1978 constitution gives the head of state a ceremonial role. It is therefore the prime minister and the government that are the key executive actors in this parliamentary regime. The government is institutionally quite powerful vis-à-vis parliament. We can see this in the rules for the election and termination of governments. In fact, the Congress of Deputies does not elect the government as a whole. Rather, it only elects the prime minister, who then has full authority to appoint his or her cabinet, with the largely ceremonial intervention of the monarch. Moreover, while the prime minister needs absolute majority support to be elected in a first-round vote, he or she7 only needs more yes than no votes in a second-round vote. In effect, abstentions and absences do not count in the second-round outcome. Parliament can only bring down the government with a constructive vote of no confidence, which happened for the first time in 2018. This means that parliament must have the votes to simultaneously censure the government

The Spanish parliament in context  31

with an absolute majority and elect a new prime minister who will, in turn, form a new government. This insulates the government from censure when the opposition is united against it but not on an alternative. Moreover, the parliament cannot vote to remove individual ministers. The government also has a number of agenda setting and control prerogatives that enhances its power (Ajenjo and Molina 2011; Field 2016: 124–140). Government bills are favoured in the parliamentary agenda, and, in practice, dominate it. The government can veto parliamentary bills and amendments to any bill that alter the current budget, though a 2018 court ruling required the government to demonstrate a budgetary effect (García Majado 2018). The government can make the last amendment proposal in plenary debates, helping it get what it wants (Heller 2001). The government has exclusive legislative initiative related to the general budget, which is automatically carried over into the next year if the government does not get a new one through parliament (Guerrero Salom 2004: 171–174). It also has the authority to issue decree laws. While the Congress of Deputies must subsequently approve or reject them, they are law when issued. Additionally, the government can call a confidence vote and survive if it wins a simple majority of more yes than no votes, which has occurred twice since the transition and the government survived both votes.8 While the government is certainly powerful vis-à-vis parliament in cross-national perspective, its power also depends on whether or not it has a majority in parliament, discussed below. Political parties structure and dominate parliamentary activity, leaving little room for personalised political behaviour. During Spain’s transition to democracy, party leaders sought to foster the development of strong, disciplined political parties given the lessons they drew from the Second Republic, the extremely weak state of party organisations at the time and to assure the compliance of their parties’ rank and file with the deals they were making (Field 2013). A variety of institutions favour party dominance. As discussed previously, deputies are elected in a closed list, PR election system. Generally, the parties control candidate selection processes, though there is variation across parties. In the two main parties, PSOE and PP, central party leadership bodies maintain ultimate control of who appears on the ballot in national parliamentary elections, a reality MPs recognise in surveys (Cordero, Jaime-Castillo, and Coller 2016). The parliamentary and party group rules are highly party-centric, and parties impose sanctions for indiscipline (Oñate 2000; Sánchez Medero and Aldeguer Cerdá 2018). In practice, voting discipline is extremely high (Field 2013, 2016: 167–169). While the basic institutional arrangements set up during the early years of democracy have persisted, the Equality Law in 2007 mandated electoral gender quotas and advanced descriptive representation. According to the law, neither sex can occupy fewer than 40 per cent of the spots on electoral candidate lists. The rule applies to each section of five positions within a list. In districts with few seats, parties need to allocate positions as equitably as possible. Nonetheless, left parties had adopted voluntary party quotas a

32  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

decade earlier, which produced a contagion effect and advanced women’s representation in parliament prior to the law’s adoption (Verge 2012). In 2016, women held 39 per cent of the seats in the Congress of Deputies and 40 per cent of the seats in the Senate (Gobierno de España 2016), compared to only 6 per cent in the Congress of Deputies in 1977.

The evolution of the party system(s)

Spain’s party system has changed during its more than 40 years of democratic governance. It is useful to divide it into four periods: the transitional multiparty system (1977–1982), a predominant party system (1982–1993), a two-party dominant system (1993–2015) and today’s multiparty system with new party challengers (2015–present) (Table 3.1).

Transitional multiparty party system (1977–1982)

Between 1977 and 1982, parliament was writing the new constitution, developing the legal norms necessary to accompany it, and setting up the contours of the decentralised state. The new democracy also faced important challenges from sectors of the armed forces, culminating in an attempted coup on 23 February 1981, and from terrorist attacks, such as from the Basque separatist group ETA (Basque Homeland and Liberty). It was also a time of party formation, and, in some cases, of party disintegration. During this period, no party had a majority in parliament, and the centre-right UCD governed in minority. The party system comprised four main statewide parties—the UCD, the Socialist Party (PSOE), the Communist Party (PCE) and the rightist Popular Alliance (AP) (later Popular Party/PP)—as well as a variety of small regional parties from Catalonia, the Basque Country, and elsewhere. The UCD was the largest party during this period, winning about 48 per cent of the seats in the Congress of Deputies. Its principal competitor was the PSOE, with about 35 per cent of the seats. To the PSOE’s left, the PCE won an average of 6 per cent of the seats. To the UCD’s right, the AP won 4.5 per cent seats in 1977 and 2.6 per cent seats in 1979.9

Other parties were relevant during this period, including the regionally based parties—the Catalan Convergence and Union (CiU), the Basque ­Nationalist Party (PNV), the Basque Herri Batasuna (HB), and the Socialist Party of Andalusia (PSA)—along with the statewide Popular Socialist Party (PSP), which ultimately disbands and merges with the PSOE in 1978. While the leftist PSA disappears as a national parliamentary actor after 1982, the centre-right, moderate nationalist parties, CiU and PNV, remain significant, though small, parliamentary actors. The secessionist, far left HB was a radical Basque nationalist party, with ties to ETA. It refused to participate in parliamentary activity, deeming Spanish institutions illegitimate. Eventually, the Basque radical left, with ties to ETA, was banned.

Table 3.1  Election results, Congress of Deputies, Spain, 1977–2016

1977 1979 1982 1986 1989 1993 1996

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

Vote (per cent)

Seat (per cent)

UCD 34.5 47 35.0 48 6.5 3 — — — — — — — — PSOE 29.2 34 30.5 35 48.3 58 44.3 53 39.9 50 39.1 45 38.0 40 PCE/IU 9.4 6 10.7 6 4.0 1 4.4 2 9.1 5 9.3 5 10.6 6 AP/PP 8.1 5 6.0 3 26.5 31 26.1 30 26.0 31 35.0 40 39.2 45 PDC/CiU 2.8 3 2.7 2 3.7 3 5.1 5 5.1 5 5.0 5 4.6 5 PNV 1.6 2 1.5 2 1.9 2 1.5 2 1.2 1 1.3 1 1.3 1 CDS — — — — 2.9 1 9.2 5 8.0 4 — — — — Others 14.4 3 13.6 4 6.2 1 9.4 3 10.7 4 10.3 3 6.3 3 Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 99 100 100

(Continued)

2000 2004 2008 2011 2015 2016

Vote (per cent) Seat (per cent) Vote (per cent) Seat (per cent) Vote (per cent) Seat (per cent) Vote (per cent) Seat (per cent) Vote (per cent) Seat (per cent) Vote (per cent) Seat (per cent)

PPa 45.2 52.3 38.3 42.3 40.4 44.0 45.2 53.1 28.7 35.1 33.1 39.1 PSOE 34.7 35.7 43.3 46.9 44.4 48.3 29.2 31.4 22.0 25.7 22.6 24.3 Podemosa — — — — — — — — 20.7 19.7 21.2 20.3 C’s — — — — — — — — 13.9 11.4 13.1 9.1 IUb 5.5 2.3 4.6 1.4 3.8 0.6 7.0 3.1 3.7 0.6 — —

CiU/CDC 4.3 4.3 3.3 2.9 3.1 2.9 4.2 4.6 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.3 PNV 1.6 2.0 1.7 2.0 1.2 1.7 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.7 1.2 1.4

CCa 1.1 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 ERC 0.9 0.3 2.6 2.3 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.9 2.4 2.6 2.6 2.6 BNG 1.3 0.9 0.8 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.3 — 0.2 — EH Bilduc — — — — — — 1.4 2.0 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.6 Others 5.4 1.1 4.5 0.9 4.4 0.6 9.2 2.3 3.6 — 2.9 — Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100

Source: Ministerio del Interior, Spain. Party acronym key: AP (Alianza Popular); BNG (Bloque Nacionalista Galego); CC (Coalición Canaria); CDS (Centro Democrático y Social); CDC (Convergència Democràtica de Catalunya); CiU (Convergència i Unió); C’s (Ciudadanos); EH Bildu (Euskal Herria Bildu); ERC (Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya); IU (Izquierda Unida); PCE (Partido Comunista de España); PDC (Pacte Democràtic per Catalunya); PNV (Partido Nacionalista Vasco); PP (Partido Popular); PSOE (Partido Socialista Obrero Español); UCD (Unión de Centro Democrático). a Includes election allies. b Allied with Podemos in 2016. c Ran as Amaiur in 2011.

The Spanish parliament in context  35

With respect to statewide or national parties, the main left-right cleavage also overlapped with parties whose leaders had opposed the rightwing authoritarian regime of Francisco Franco (PCE and PSOE) and those that were linked to it (UCD and AP). In contrast, the centre-right regionally based nationalist parties did not have links to the prior regime, which had repressed and persecuted peripheral nationalism. A secondary cleavage, the centre-periphery one, also existed and persists. The leftist PCE and PSOE were less centralist and more tolerant of diverse national identities than the UCD and AP, indicating an overlap with the left-right division. However, the overlap is not as neat among regional parties. There are several regional parties on the left (e.g. ERC, HB) and centre-right (e.g. CiU, PNV) that advance pro-periphery positions. Regional parties tend to be more pro-periphery than the statewide parties. Yet, there is also great variation among them, ranging from parties that advocate secession to those that want greater regional autonomy within the existing state.

Predominant party system (1982–1993)

During the 1982–1993 period, the Socialist Party, under the leadership of Felipe González, dominated the national party system and governed in majority. The 1982 parliamentary elections produced a stunning defeat of the incumbent UCD, as a result of infighting and party splits. Winning only 3 per cent of seats in the Congress, it subsequently disbanded as a political party. In contrast, the PSOE won a comfortable absolute majority of the seats in 1982 (58 per cent) and 1986 (53 per cent), and exactly half of the seats in 1989. After the 1982 elections, the Popular Alliance became the largest party of the right. However, the electoral support for the two largest parties was more uneven than in the past. In the Congress of Deputies (with 350 MPs), the UCD had had 48 or 47 more MPs than the PSOE during the 1977–1979 period. In contrast, the PSOE had 97 (1982), 79 (1986) and 68 (1989) more seats than the AP/PP in the new party system. The ideological distance between the two main parties was also greater because the AP was anchored solidly on the political right. The centre-right Democratic and Social Centre (CDS)—a new party that split from the UCD in 1982—won seats through the 1989 elections. Among the smaller parties, the electoral fortunes of the PCE varied. In part due to internal divisions, the PCE saw its support drop dramatically in 1982 (from 23 to 4 seats). In 1986, it began to run candidates in an alliance of leftist and new left parties, United Left (IU). While it never returns to its transition era fortunes, its representation in Congress improved by 1989 (17 seats). The most important regional parties during this period were the centre-right Catalan CiU and the Basque PNV. However, their support was not necessary for the PSOE to govern.

36  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

Two-party dominant system (1993–2015)

Between 1993 and 2015, two parties dominate the party system, the Socialists and the Popular Party (PP), though there are smaller relevant parties whose support is critical when one of the main parties does not win a majority. Governments were either single-party majority or minority ones. In 1989, AP was re-founded as the Popular Party. In the process, it consolidated much of the political right into a unified party, except the regionally based nationalist parties. Under party leader José María Aznar, the party also moved towards the centre-right (García-Guereta Rodríguez 2001). These changes and the decline in support for the PSOE, due to corruption and the costs of governing, led to stiffer competition between the two main parties after 1993. The PSOE maintained its position as the largest party in parliament in the 1993 elections, without a majority (45 per cent of seats). Yet, the PP won the 1996 parliamentary elections for the first time since the transition, also without a majority (45 per cent of seats). It won a majority in 2000 (52 per cent of seats). The Socialists won the elections in 2004 and 2008, under the leadership of José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, 12 and 7 seats short of an absolute majority, respectively. When they did not have a majority, each of the large parties relied on smaller political parties in order to govern and accomplish their legislative priorities. Before 2000, the moderate centre-right regional parties were key: the Catalan CiU, the Basque PNV and the Canary Islands Coalition (CC). After 2000, leftist regional parties, including the Republican Left of ­Catalonia (ERC) and the Galician Nationalist Bloc (BNG), along with IU, grow in importance for PSOE minority governments. Signs of party system change appear in the 2011 elections. The international economic crisis began to hit Spain hard in 2009 and eventually led to the Euro crisis and a deep political crisis in Spain. Voters punished the governing Socialists at the polls, where they won the fewest seats (31 per cent) since the transition to democracy. However, newcomers did not emerge to disrupt the party system as a whole. The elections instead delivered a major victory to the Popular Party, under the leadership of Mariano Rajoy. The PP won with an absolute majority of seats (53 per cent). The opposition in parliament was much more fragmented.

Multiparty system and new party challengers (2015–2019)

Spain’s current party system is one in which there are four significant statewide parties, along with a set of smaller regional parties. A fifth, Vox, is projected to enter parliament in 2019. The 2015 parliamentary elections transformed Spain’s national party system and thus far has made governing challenging. The PP and PSOE are still the largest parties. However, newcomers Podemos (We can) and Ciudadanos (Citizens/C’s) rose to challenge them

The Spanish parliament in context  37

(Rodríguez-Teruel and Barrio 2016; Rodríguez-Teruel, Barrio, and ­Barberà 2016). Studies show that the party system’s transformation is rooted in Spain’s economic crisis as well as in dissatisfaction with the political system, related to a crisis of representation and political corruption (e.g. Vidal 2018). Downplaying ideology, the newcomers clearly campaigned on their outsider status, and won support for it, bringing an element of an insider-­ outsider cleavage to Spanish politics. However, they have come to easily fit into the deep-seated left-right and centre-periphery cleavages. Podemos occupies a far-left ideological space and has been the national party that has been most supportive of diverse national identities, such as in Catalonia, going as far as backing a referendum on Catalan independence from Spain. Ciudadanos, on the other hand, occupies a centre-right ideological space. Yet it is hostile to multinational identities. In fact, it began as a regional party in Catalonia that opposed Catalan nationalism. The challenge Podemos posed to the Socialists was initially more acute, with polls at times having indicated it would surpass the PSOE. Ultimately, Podemos won about 20 per cent of the seats in the 2015 or 2016 elections, compared to about 25 per cent for the Socialists. On the right, the PP held on to its position as the largest party in parliament, with 35 per cent and 39 per cent of the seats in 2015 and 2016, respectively. Ciudadanos won 11 per cent (2015) and 9 per cent (2016) of the seats. Yet, in early 2019, it is the PP that faces a serious threat from Ciudadanos and the far right Vox. Changes within the Catalan parties also mark the new party system. The previously moderate Catalan CiU, which in fact was a federation of two parties, split before the 2015 general elections. One of the component parties embraced independence for Catalonia, Democratic Convergence of Catalonia (CDC), and the other, Democratic Union of Catalonia, disbanded in 2017. In 2016, CDC was refounded as the Catalan European Democratic Party (PDeCat) to accommodate its secessionist position and to attempt to escape the taint of corruption scandals. Jointly with the leftist ERC, it launched a push for independence that led to the most severe crisis Spain has faced since the early years of democracy.

Governance: single-party minority and majority cabinets

Spain has had 15 governments since its transition to democracy in 1977 until 2018. All have been single party governments. Leaving aside the (minority) caretaker government of PP Prime Minister Rajoy between 2015 and 2016, four were majority governments and ten were minority ones. Minority governments are those in which the governing party (or parties) does not simultaneously have an absolute majority of the seats in the parliament. Spain is among the European countries with the highest incidence of minority government (Field 2016) (Table 3.2). In the period before 2015, parliament normally formed governments quite easily, even when no party had a majority. PM Calvo-Sotelo in 1981

38  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

and PM Zapatero in 2008 were the only two prime ministers elected in a second-round vote, and Zapatero strategically preferred it. Spain’s governments also tended to last, with an average relative duration—the percentage of the maximum possible duration—of 81 per cent between 1977 and 2015, and 90 per cent in the post-transition years between 1982 and 2015. Governments, majority and minority, typically had high legislative productivity and passed their bills, with a success rate of 89 per cent between 1982 and 2011 (Field 2016: 79–80). They also tended to fulfil their election pledges, even in minority (Artés 2013). Because of their institutional and partisan political power, majority governments diminish parliament’s strength. PM González governed in majority twice (1982–1986; 1986–1989). González’ 1989 government was unique. The PSOE held exactly half of the seats in the Congress of Deputies (putting it in the minority government category). However, because the radical Basque HB did not take its seats, the PSOE governed with a de facto majority, except when the rules required an absolute majority vote of all of the members of the chamber, which is rare. The PP has also governed in majority, under PM Aznar (2000–2004) and PM Rajoy (2011–2015). During periods of minority government, parliament is more central and nongovernmental parties gain influence, as one would expect. However, between 1982 and 2011, there was little difference between the performance of minority and majority governments when it came to their ability to pass legislation, accomplish their political agendas and last (Field 2016). Field’s

Table 3.2  Governments and government status, Spain, 1977–2018

Dates Party Prime Minister Status Caretaker Formed after election

Governing party seats in Congressa (per cent)

1977–1979 UCD Suárez I Minority — Yes 166 (47) 1979–1981 UCD Suárez II Minority — Yes 168 (48) 1981–1982 UCD Calvo-Sotelo Minority — No 165 (47) 1982–1986 PSOE González I Majority — Yes 202 (58) 1986–1989 PSOE González II Majority — Yes 184 (53) 1989–1993 PSOE González III Minorityb — Yes 175 (50) 1993–1996 PSOE González IV Minority — Yes 159 (45) 1996–2000 PP Aznar I Minority — Yes 156 (45) 2000–2004 PP Aznar II Majority — Yes 183 (52) 2004–2008 PSOE Zapatero I Minority — Yes 164 (47) 2008–2011 PSOE Zapatero II Minority — Yes 169 (48) 2011–2015 PP Rajoy I Majority — Yes 186 (53) 2015–2016 PP Rajoy II Minority Yes — 119 (34) 2016–2018 PP Rajoy III Minority — Yes 134 (38) 2018–2019 PSOE Sánchez I Minority — No 84 (24)

The Spanish parliament in context  39

study identifies several reasons: Spain’s institutions strengthen governments generally. Spain’s decentralised state makes it possible for (governing) parties to trade political support across state levels (national, regional, local). The governments tended to have strong partisan bargaining positions, with a large plurality of the seats in parliament and potential allies that needed support at other state levels. And, importantly, governments relied on regional parties that had little interest in governing Spain (and therefore supplanting the government) and a strong interest in collaborating with a government that needed them, in exchange for concessions. Yet not all minority governments have been the same. During the early years of democracy, the UCD governed in minority under Prime Ministers Adolfo Suárez (1977–1981) and Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo (1981–1982). These governments did not rely on the support of any particular party in parliament. Parties behaved quite consensually in law making, including the governing party and the main opposition PSOE, among others (Capo Giol 1990; Field 2005). The minority governments between 1993 and 2011 primarily relied on regional parties. In the 1990s, the minority governments of Socialist PM Felipe González (1993–1996) and conservative PM José María Aznar (1996– 2000) primarily relied on the parliamentary support of the centre-right regionally based nationalist parties—the Catalan CiU, the Basque PNV and the Canary Islands CC (Field 2016: 98–111; Heller 2002; Reniu i Vilamala 2002). In contrast, the first minority government of Socialist PM José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero (2004–2008) relied to a greater extent on the support of leftist regionally based parties, such as the Catalan ERC and IU (Field 2016: 111–115). This pattern flipped during Zapatero’s second government (2008–2011), when it allied more frequently with the centre-right regional parties (Field 2016: 115–118). Also compared to the Aznar and González minority governments, the Zapatero governments frequently shifted parliamentary allies in parliament (referred to as a strategy of variable geometry or geometría variable). Parliament-government relations have shifted in the aftermath of party system change in 2015, and produced minority governments with weaker bargaining positions. In 2015 and with no party winning more than about a third of the seats, parliament was unable to form a government. This left the Rajoy government in power with caretaker status and new elections had to be called in 2016. Yet, parliament again struggled to agree on a government. With elections again looming, parliament invested Rajoy as prime minister in a second-round vote. Ciudadanos and the Canary Islands Coalition, with which Rajoy had agreements, supported his investiture. Yet it was the abstention of most of the deputies of the Socialist Party that allowed the government to form. This occurred only after the party faced a severe internal crisis over the investiture vote, leading to the removal of the party’s leader Pedro Sánchez and to several deputies breaking party discipline—in this normally highly disciplined party—to vote against Rajoy’s investiture.

40  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

Rajoy then formed a minority government, with the governing party holding the fewest seats in the Congress of Deputies (38 per cent) since the transition. This government would prove to be short-lived. A vote of no confidence by the Socialist Party and with the support of Podemos and almost all of the regionally based parties ousted the Rajoy government in 2018 and brought to power a Socialist single party minority government under a resurrected Pedro Sánchez, with even fewer seats in parliament than the PP had under Rajoy. The Rajoy government between 2016 and 2018 broke the pattern of effective minority governments, with few legislative initiatives and a comparably lower approval rate for government bills, which its inability to pass a general budget in 2017 for 2018 most prominently exemplifies.10 The Sánchez minority government also faced challenging governing circumstances, and early elections were called in 2019.

Decentralisation: the dispersion of policy-making authority

Unlike in Portugal, Spain’s parliament shares law-making authority with 17 regional parliaments, as well as with European institutions. One of the biggest challenges of the transition to democracy was how to accommodate Spain’s different regional identities within the Spanish state following their repression under Franco. The constitution of 1978 ended up designing what Colomer (1998) describes as an “ambiguous constitutional compromise” akin to “non-institutional federalism”. This was an attempt to reach a minimum consensus that could satisfy not only the regionally based nationalists who wanted special recognition for their territories and ideally some form of confederal arrangement, but also the variety of Spanish political forces, from those on the right who wanted a unitary, centralised state to those on the left who preferred a form of symmetric decentralisation. Broadly speaking, the compromises involved maintaining the provinces first created in the 19th century and grouping them into 17 autonomous communities or regions, each with its own regional parliament and government, and its own regional autonomy statute, akin to a regional constitution. Three of the autonomous communities, the Basque Country, Catalonia and Galicia, were given a “fast-track” route to a certain degree of autonomy via article 151 in an attempt to satisfy the nationalists in those regions. All three had approved a regional autonomy statute for the first time in the 1930s, subsequently abolished under the dictatorship of Franco. The Spanish constitution did not recognise them as nations, conceiving of one Spanish nation only, but it did designate them as “historic nationalities”. The remaining 14 autonomous communities were given a slower route to autonomy via article 143, though Andalusia then won the right to be considered a historic region instead (Colomer 1998: 45). Overall, the decentralisation formula was left deliberately vague in terms of exactly what policy competences the regions would ultimately achieve. Eventually, many of the standard autonomous communities ended up seeking

The Spanish parliament in context  41

more or less the same level of competences as the historic ones. The system therefore became known as café para todos11 (“coffee for all”)—which the nationalist parties from the historic regions strongly criticised. This model inadvertently ended up encouraging competition between regional governments themselves—not only for competences, but also for the resources to finance them. There are a handful of fora that bring together the central government and the regional governments in Spain—primarily the fiscal and financial policy council (Consejo de Política Fiscal y Financiera, CPFF), meetings of the national and regional education ministers and the consultative conference on European affairs. However, conflictive rather than cooperative dynamics have beset them, since each regional government seeks the best outcome for its own territory (Colomer 1998: 40, Gray 2016: 65). This, in turn, has consequences for the behaviour of statewide parties in the Spanish parliament too. For example, regional politicians in longstanding PSOE strongholds in southern Spain—most notably Andalusia, but also traditionally Extremadura and Castilla-La Mancha—have often had a significant influence on the behaviour of the party in the Spanish parliament. The PP also has its regions where it has tended to win time and time again, such as Valencia, which it governed for two decades (1995–2015), until the corruption crisis engulfing the party eroded its support base. The dominance of each party in certain regions helps to explain, for example, why Spanish governments have repeatedly failed over the years to overhaul the common financing system to resolve the situation criticised by successive Catalan governments, whereby the region arguably loses more than a fair share of its wealth to other regions (Gray 2014: 24–27). Improving that situation for Catalonia would inevitably have a detrimental impact on some other regions in Spain which are PP- or PSOE-dominated. By the late 1990s, growing calls were emerging from Basque and Catalan nationalists in particular for a revision of their regional autonomy statutes (and also of the Spanish constitution), which also unleashed a wider wave of statute reform in other regions. Supporting minority central governments via “mutual back scratching” (Field 2014) arrangements had by then become the main bargaining tool the regionally based nationalists used to secure decentralisation gains. Yet this was inherently subject to the risk of instability. It gave the nationalists’ extensive leverage at times, but left them with little leverage at other times when a party won the Spanish general elections with an absolute majority, as the PP has done twice since 2000 (Gray 2016: 66). Moreover, the Spanish government can still introduce basic laws that override regional laws even in the case of decentralised competences. Notable sources of grievance in recent years in times of absolute majority PP government include the highly controversial 2013 education law, known as the “Wert Law” after its creator José Ignacio Wert, then PP education minister. This sought to increase Spanish control over regional education systems, the language of instruction, and course content.

42  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

The Catalan independence movement that rapidly grew from around 2010 onwards has undoubtedly posed the greatest challenge to Spain’s decentralisation model. In response, the Spanish authorities eventually had recourse to article 155 of Spain’s constitution for the first time. Known as Spain’s “nuclear option”, this allows the central government to intervene in the governance of any region that goes against the constitution or Spanish law. This is one of the few occasions on which the Senate has more power than the Congress of Deputies, for the measure requires absolute majority approval from the Senate only. The Senate overwhelmingly approved Rajoy’s request to implement article 155 shortly after the Catalan parliament had voted in favour of declaring independence from Spain on 27 October 2017, following an unconstitutional referendum the pro-independence Catalan government organised. This paved the way for Spain to dismiss the Catalan parliament and call new regional elections, held on 21 December 2017. Thus, while extensive powers have been devolved to Spain’s regional governments, the Spanish upper house retains the power to suspend those with one vote. Developments in Catalonia have also affected politics in the national parliament. The disappearance of moderate Catalan nationalists, who had been such important parliamentary allies of Spain’s minority governments, makes governing in minority more difficult.

Conclusions

Parliamentary institutions in Spain have remained remarkably stable over the democratic period. Nonetheless, the context in which parliament has operated and indeed the key actors in parliament have changed either progressively or intermittently. Spain has Europeanised since it first sought admission into the EEC and it remains one of Europe’s most pro-EU countries. Spain has also progressively devolved political authority to its autonomous communities, which now count among the regions with the highest level of political authority in Europe. Europeanisation and devolution dispersed policy making authority, circumscribing the role of the central parliament. While Spain has certainly experienced economic ups-and-downs, its economic progress since the transition until the worldwide economic crisis began in 2008 was astounding. After 2009, however, the economic crisis triggered serious challenges that tore at Spain’s social fabric, transformed its party system and complicated the formation and stability of governments. Whether this generates institutional change remains to be seen. Also, despite institutional continuities, parliament’s power and centrality in practice depend on the type of government in office, whether it is a majority or minority one, and indeed on the bargaining strength of the minority government in power. More often than not, Spain has had minority governments, necessitating frequent negotiations to achieve support from parties in parliament. For a long time, this afforded Spain government stability,

The Spanish parliament in context  43

but also helped, as a by-product, to paper over the cracks in Spain’s model of territorial decentralisation. When minority governments needed the support of regionally based nationalist parties in parliament, it gave the latter opportunities to secure concessions for their home region in return. Considering representation, women have progressively gained access to political office in parliament (and government), thereby significantly improving women’s descriptive representation since the early days of democracy. Nonetheless, the descriptive representation of Spain’s immigrant and multi-ethnic populations is wanting.12

The party system has changed periodically during past four decades, while the key political cleavages—the left-right and centre-periphery—that shape parliamentary politics remain. At times, parliament has been more fragmented (e.g. 1977–1982 and 2015–2019) and at other times the two main parties, PSOE and PP, dominated (1993–2011), though Spain has never had a perfect two-party system. Parties have also come and gone, and with them political positions in parliament. Among the most significant statewide parties, the centrist UCD disappeared in 1982. The rightwing Alianza Popular moderated and was refounded as the Popular Party 1989. Newcomers Podemos and Ciudadanos surged as sizeable challengers in 2015, and Vox in 2018. That said, they have slotted into the established left-right and centre-periphery axes of competition. There have also been important changes among the regionally based parties. The radical left Basque nationalists with ties to terrorism were outlawed from parliament, reappearing under a new formation (EH Bildu) only once they explicitly renounced violence, and moderate right Catalan nationalists embraced secessionism. The latter meant the disappearance of CiU and the refounding of CDC as PDeCat. It also went along with close collaboration between the centre-right PDeCat and the historically secessionist leftist ERC, and tense relations with Spain’s major parties. Whether or not the shift towards a multiparty system from 2015 ends up becoming a permanent feature of Spain’s political landscape or a passing phase, the very fact that two new statewide parties have broken through, where others had failed in the past, and a third is set to do so, is a significant feat that reveals the extent of the crisis in representation in Spain.

Notes

1 “Las Cortes franquistas se hacen el harakiri,” La Vanguardia, 18 November 2016. Available at: www.lavanguardia.com/hemeroteca/20161118/411940452844/ espana-transicion-politica-ley-para-la-reforma-politica-adolfo-suarez-­torcuatofernandez-miranda.html. 2 An English version of the constitution (last accessed 20 April 2018): www.congreso.es/constitucion/ficheros/c78/cons_ingl.pdf. 3 Part of the Senate is indirectly elected. 4 There are also signs that support for the EU has declined among Catalan secessionists, especially because EU officials have given little support to the independence push.

44  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

5 Spain’s public sector debt figures calculated according to the Excessive Deficit Procedure, published by the Bank of Spain: www.bde.es/webbde/es/estadis/infoest/htmls/cdp.html (last accessed 29 April 2018). 6 Authors’ calculation. 7 Spain has yet to elect a woman prime minister. It has had several women deputy prime ministers, including María Teresa Fernández de la Vega (PSOE), Elena Salgado (PSOE), Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría (PP), and Carmen Calvo (PSOE). 8 An English version of the Standing Orders of the Congress of Deputies (last accessed 20 April 2018): www.congreso.es/portal/page/portal/Congreso/­Congreso/ Hist_Normas/Norm/standing_orders_02.pdf. 9 All election data related to the Congress of Deputies and are from Spain’s Ministry of Interior, available at: www.infoelectoral.mir.es/. 10 Fernando Garea, “El PSOE es el grupo más determinante en las votaciones del Congreso,” El Confidencial, 27 November 2017, available at: www.elconfidencial.com/ espana/2017-11-27/el-psoe-es-el-que-mas-deterninate-en-el-congreso-y-coincidecon-podemos-en-la-mayoria-de-votaciones_1483848/. Fernando Garea, “Rajoy intenta impulsar una agenda política que dé imagen de actividad,” El Confidencial, 31 December 2017, available at www.elconfidencial.com/espana/2017-12-31/rajoyagenda-politica-imagen-­actividad-cataluna-ciudadanos_1499782/. “Spain’s hyperactive parliament stalls reform,” Politico, 21 March 2018, available at: www.politico. eu/article/spain-hyperactive-parliament-mariano-rajoy-pp-legislation-congress/. 11 Phrase first coined by Manuel Clavero Arévalo, then UCD minister for the regions, who fought for Andalusia—his home region—to be given the same treatment as the Basque Country, Catalonia and Galicia. “Un cortado con Clavero Arévalo, el padre del café envenenado de las autonomías: ‘No ha sido un fracaso’,” El Español, 28 October 2017, www.elespanol.com/reportajes/20171027/257475415_0. html (last accessed 4 May 2018). 12 “Spain’s minorities are under-represented in politics, report finds,” El País (in English). Available at: https://elpais.com/elpais/2016/02/22/inenglish/1456150941_431026. html.

References

Aguilar, Paloma. 2002. Memory and Amnesia: The Role of the Spanish Civil War in the Transition to Democracy. New York: Berghahn Books. Ajenjo, Natalia, and Ignacio Molina. 2011. “Majoritarian Choices, Disciplined Party Government and Compliant Legislature.” In The Role of Governments in Legislative Agenda Setting, edited by Bjorn Erik Rasch and George Tsebelis, ­164–183. London: Routledge. Alonso, Sonia, and Cristóbal Rovira Kaltwasser. 2015. “Spain: No Country for the Populist Radical Right?” South European Society and Politics 20 (1):21–45. Álvarez Tardío, Manuel. 2004. “Ni República Parlamentaria ni Presidencialista.” Revista de Estudios Políticos (Nueva Epoca) 123:175–200. Artés, Joaquín. 2013. “Do Spanish Politicians Keep Their Promises?” Party Politics 19 (1):143–158. Bergman, Torbjörn. 1993. “Formation Rules and Minority Governments.” ­European Journal of Political Research 23 (1):55–66. Capo Giol, Jordi. 1990. La Legislación Estatal en la España democrática: Una Aproximación Politológica. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Constitucionales. Chari, Raj S. 1998. “Spanish Socialists, Privatising the Right Way?” West European Politics 21 (4):163–179.

The Spanish parliament in context  45

Colomer, Josep. 1998. “The Spanish ‘State of Autonomies’: Non-Institutional Federalism.” West European Politics 21 (4):40–52. Cordero, Guillermo, Antonio M. Jaime-Castillo, and Xavier Coller. 2016. “Candidate Selection in a Multilevel State: The Case of Spain.” American Behavioral Scientist 60 (7):853–868. European Commission. 2017. Country Report Spain 2017. Brussels: European Commission. Field, Bonnie N. 2005. “De-thawing Democracy: The Decline of Political Party Collaboration in Spain (1977 to 2004).” Comparative Political Studies 38 (9):1079–1103. Field, Bonnie N. 2013. “Resolute Leaders and ‘Cardboard Deputies’: Parliamentary Party Unity in the New Spanish Democracy.” South European Society and Politics 18 (3):355–374. Field, Bonnie N. 2014. “Minority Parliamentary Government and Multilevel Politics: Spain’s System of Mutual Back Scratching.” Comparative Politics 46 (3):293–312. Field, Bonnie N. 2016. Why Minority Governments Work: Multilevel Territorial Politics in Spain. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. García-Guereta Rodríguez, Elena María. 2001. Factores Externos e Internos en la Transformación de los Partidos Políticos: El Caso de AP-PP. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Avanzados en Ciencias Sociales. García Majado, Patricia. 2018. “Del uso al abuso del veto presupuestario.” Agenda Pública, 19 April 2018. http://agendapublica.elperiodico.com/del-uso-al-abuso- del-veto-presupuestario/. Giménez Martínez, Miguel Ángel. 2012. Las Cortes Españolas en el régimen de Franco: Nacimiento, desarrollo y extinción de una Cámara Orgánica. Madrid: Congreso de los Diputados. Gobierno de España. 2016. Mujeres y hombres en España. Madrid: Gobierno de España. González-Enríquez, Carmen. 2017. “The Spanish Exception: Unemployment, Inequality and Immigration, but no Right-Wing Populist Parties.” Working Paper 3/2017 Real Instituto Elcano. Gray, Caroline. 2014. “Smoke and Mirrors: How Regional Finances Complicate Spanish-Catalan Relations.” International Journal of Iberian Studies 27 (1):21–42. Gray, Caroline. 2016. Nationalist Politics and Regional Financing Systems in the Basque Country and Catalonia. Foral Treasury Doctoral Thesis Collection, Bilbao/Bizkaia. Guerrero Salom, Enrique. 2004. El Parlamento: Qué es, cómo funciona, qué hace. Madrid: Editorial Síntesis. Gunther, Richard. 1992. “Spain: The Very Model of the Modern Elite Settlement.” In Elites and Democratic Consolidation in Latin America and Southern Europe, edited by John Higley and Richard Gunther, 38–80. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Heller, William B. 2001. “Making Policy Stick: Why the Government Gets What It Wants in Multiparty Parliaments.” American Journal of Political Science 45 (4):780–798. Heller, William B. 2002. “Regional Parties and National Politics in Europe: Spain’s Estado de las Autonomías, 1993 to 2000.” Comparative Political Studies 35 (6):657–685. Juliá, Santos. 1995. “Sistema de partidos y problemas de consolidación de la democracia.” Ayer (20):111–139.

46  Bonnie N. Field and Caroline Gray

Kölling, Mario, and Ignacio Molina. 2015. “The Spanish National Parliament and the European Union: Slow Adaptation to New Responsibilities in Times of ­Crisis.” In The Palgrave Handbook of National Parliaments and the European Union, edited by Claudia Hefftler, Christine Neuhold, Olivier Rozenberg and Julie Smith, 348–365. London: Palgrave. Marcuello, Juan Ignacio, and Manuel Pérez Ledesma. 1996. “Parlamento y poder ejecutivo en la España contemporánea (1810–1936).” Revista de Estudios Políticos (Nueva Epoca) 93:17–38. Martínez Chacón, Elvira, ed. 2009. Economía Española. Second ed. Barcelona: Editorial Planeta. OECD. 2016. Income Inequality Update (November 2016). Income Inequality Remains High in the Face of Weak Recovery. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/­ social/OECD2016-Income-Inequality-Update.pdf Oñate, Pablo. 2000. “Congreso, Grupos Parlamentarios y Partidos.” In El Congreso de los Diputados en España: Funciones y Rendimiento, edited by Antonia Martínez, 95–139. Madrid: Tecnos. Palau, Anna M., Luz Muñoz Márquez, and Laura Chaqués-Bonafont. 2014.

­“Government–Opposition Dynamics in Spain under the Pressure of Economic Collapse and the Debt Crisis.” The Journal of Legislative Studies 21 (1):75–95. doi: 10.1080/13572334.2014.939565. Radcliff, Pamela Beth. 2011. Making Democratic Citizens in Spain: Civil Society and the Popular Origins of the Transition, 1960–78. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Real Instituto Elcano. 2006. 20 Years of Spain in the European Union (1986–2006). Working Paper. Madrid: Real Instituto Elcano. Reniu i Vilamala, Josep María. 2002. La formación de gobiernos minoritarios en España, 1977–1996. Madrid: Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas. Rodríguez-Teruel, Juan, and Astrid Barrio. 2016. “Going National: Ciudadanos from Catalonia to Spain.” South European Society and Politics 21 (4):587–607. Rodríguez-Teruel, Juan, Astrid Barrio, and Oscar Barberà. 2016. “Fast and Furious: Podemos’ Quest for Power in Multi-level Spain.” South European Society and Politics 21 (4):561–585. Royo, Sebastian. 2009. “Reforms Betrayed? Zapatero and the Continuities in Economic Policy.” South European Society and Politics 14 (4):435–451. Salmon, Keith. 2017. “A Decade of Lost Growth. Economic Policy in Spain through the Great Recession.” South European Society and Politics 22 (2):239–260. Sánchez-Cuenca, Ignacio, and Elias Dinas. 2012. “Introduction: Voters and Parties in the Spanish Political Space.” South European Society and Politics 17 (3):365–374. Sánchez Medero, Gema, and Bernabé Aldeguer Cerdá. 2018. “Un Estudio de la Disciplina Partidista de los Diputados Españoles en el Congreso.” Revista de Ciencia Política 38 (1):83–104. Threlfall, Monica. 2008. “Reassessing the Role of Civil Society Organizations in the Transition to Democracy in Spain.” Democratization 15 (5):930–951. Verge, Tània. 2012. “Institutionalizing Gender Equality in Spain: From Party

­Quotas to Electoral Gender Quotas.” West European Politics 35 (2):395–414. Vidal, Guillem. 2018. “Challenging Business as Usual? The Rise of New Parties in Spain in Times of Crisis.” West European Politics 41 (2):261–286. Vintró Castells, Joan. 2007. La investidura parlamentaria del Gobierno: perspectiva comparada y Constitución española. Madrid: Congreso de los Diputados.

Section II Internal organisation structures

Introduction

Parliamentary party groups (PPGs) are

an organised group of members of a representative body who were elected either under the same party label or under the label of different parties that do not compete against each other in elections, and who do not explicitly create for technical reasons only. (Heidar and Koole 2000: 249)

Together with parliamentary committees, PPGs are the pivotal organisational units of parliaments (Saalfeld and Strøm 2014). To be sure, PPGs heighten, first, the organisation of “responsible party governments”, which are instrumental for accountability in liberal democracies (Aldrich 1995). Second, they help MPs in their efforts to attain their goals: being returned to parliament, influence policy-making and have prestige in the chamber (Mayhew 1974). Canonical accounts of party organisation place PPGs as part of a more comprehensive structure. Key (1955) makes a conceptual division between “party in the electorate”, “party as organisation” and “party in government”. Each of these party facets (Katz and Mair 1993) fulfils a role in the functioning of the party, creating, at times, competing incentives for MPs. In this chapter, we focus on the role of PPGs in the Iberian legislatures. For all its importance, this topic has been largely overlooked in the extant comparative literature (see, Heidar and Koole 2000). Indeed, in Portugal and Spain, PPGs are an important element in political parties due to the political environment in which they operate. To be sure, the closed-list electoral system creates few incentives to cultivate a personal vote. In return, the party leadership becomes the pivotal principal for MPs seeking re-election, through the obeisance of the latter to the PPG (and, in turn, of the PPG to the party leadership). In Spain, the parliamentary fractions first achieved legal status under the Second Republic (1931–1936) through the parliament’s statutes. These early

4 Parliamentary party groups in the Iberian democracies

Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

50  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

PPGs were highly autonomous from the extraparliamentary parties (except for the Radical Party) and quickly became the main actors in the chamber at the expense of individual MPs. The Civil War (1936–1939) and the ensuing Francoist period (1939–1977) aborted this evolution, despite the authoritarian regime’s attempts to emulate the existence of parliamentary groups in the non-democratic chamber (the Cortes). With the return of democracy, the 1978 Constitution introduced a rationalised regime of parliamentarism, with a robust formal position for the PPGs, which were, however, the pure expression of political parties. Previous democratic experiments in Portugal – the Constitutional Monarchy (1820–1910) and First Republic (1910–1926) – were characterised by individual MPs that were largely unbeholden to a parliamentary group or party in their behaviour and coalesced more on personal or clientelistic lines than partisan ones. The first inklings of recognition of party groups in parliament occurred with the constitutional amendment of September 1919, which created a Parliamentary Council, to include “all currents of opinion” in Parliament. However, this was more an (unsuccessful) attempt to mitigate parliamentary instability than a recognition of strong and cohesive PPGs. Salazar’s authoritarian Estado Novo (New State) largely coincided with the Francoist regime but did not replicate its Spanish counterpart’s attempts at emulating PPGs in parliament. While the Estado Novo retained a parliament (the Assembleia Nacional), this was a rubber stamp – and an increasingly weakened one at that – entirely monopolised by the Estado Novo-sanctioned União Nacional (National Union, renamed Popular National Action in 1970) throughout the regime’s 41-year existence. The sole partial exception to this pattern was the reformist “liberal wing” (Ala Liberal) that Salazar’s successor, Marcello Caetano, allowed to run in the lists of the União Nacional in the 1969 elections, part of his attempts to liberalise the regime. This liberal wing – comprised of some 30 deputies – can, arguably, be seen as a brief proto-parliamentary group in the Estado Novo, pushing for some liberalising reforms before largely dropping out of parliament by the ensuing elections of 1973 (and then mostly re-emerging post-1974 in the centre-right PSD). This chapter examines the formal rules and practices that define the role of PPGs in contemporary Iberian legislative politics. In the Spanish case of weak bicameralism, we will focus on the lower chamber (Congreso de los Diputados) because of its predominance over the Senate. The chapter begins by assessing the formal status of PPGs in the two countries. It then examines the resources of PPGs, before dealing with their internal functioning; relationship with the extra-parliamentary party; and with the executive.

Institutional status of PPGs in parliaments

Portuguese and Spanish PPGs are highly regulated. Formal rules, particularly the statutes of the assemblies, extensively develop their functions, structures and powers. In this respect, they have followed the same pattern

Parliamentary party groups  51

developed by groups in other West European parliaments, adopting an internal organisation according to the model of a parliamentary party complex, with high external organisational resources and a high degree of discipline (Heidar and Koole 2000: 11). In Spain, PPGs have been constitutionally recognised since 1978 and extensively regulated by the chamber’s rules of procedure, besides the internal statutes of the groups themselves. The Constitution refers to them only when it sets that the Permanent Deputation of the parliament will be composed by representatives of the different groups (art 78.1). The regulation (or lack thereof) of PPGs in the Constitution reflects the constitutional drafters’ view that the parliamentary groups should remain an issue for the chambers’ statutes (Saiz Arnaiz 1989: 90). Overall, the constitutional regulation displays some tension between the relevant role given to the party (and indirectly to the PPG), and the individual autonomy of the representatives insofar as the principle of the compulsory mandate is rejected (art 67.2). Parliamentary rules are more detailed in defining the legal status and composition of the PPGs, as well as their prerogatives and functions in the legislative process. According to these rules, groups can be formed in the five days after the opening the chamber. Typically, rules require a minimum of 15 members of the parliament to form a group from the same or different parties. Alternatively, parties could also achieve a PPG with at least five MPs, and either 5 per cent of the total vote in Spain or 15 per cent of the vote in each of those districts where it was running. This constellation of criteria aims to reduce the number of statewide parties forming groups while allowing for non-statewide parties with a relevant role in some regions to have separate groups in the parliament. Consequently, Catalan (CiU) and Basque (PNV) nationalist parties have always had distinct groups representing regional interests, which gave them a prominent role in the legislative process at the national level. On the contrary, some minor national parties could not form their own PPG, despite garnering a similar or even more significant number of votes than these regionalist forces. In other situations, the major parties lend some of their MPs to small parties in order to achieve the group status. Five days after the constitution of the chamber, all the MPs not included in any PPG will automatically form part of the Mixed group. A more controverted issue has been related to the possibility that electoral alliances could form different PPGs. Indeed, in 1977 and 1979, the Socialist Catalan party (PSOE’s sister organisation in Catalonia) had its group (the PSOE’s Basque branch did the same in 1979). In doing so, the Socialists got more resources and floor time in the parliament. To avoid such fragmentation, in 1982, the new chamber rules introduced a new requirement that MPs from electoral coalitions of different parties that had not competed against each other could not form different groups. PPGs have several crucial functions in the internal organisation of the Spanish legislature (Pérez Serrano 1989: 205). First and foremost, PPGs

52  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

elect representatives and participate in the leading bodies of the chamber: the parliamentary committees (Comisiones), the praesidium (Mesa) of the Congress and the board of the spokesmen (Junta de Portavoces). Second, PPGs are the only body entitled to present amendments, dissenting opinions and non-government bills to the parliament during the legislative process. Third, the groups also must allow the members to present several measures of political control to the government, like information requests, interpellations, or non-legislative motions. To be sure, some of these initiatives can be proposed by the MPs, but their PPG spokesmen must sign them. MPs are fully autonomous only when submitting oral or written questions. Finally, the PPGs share with the MPs the power to propose constitutional review or comprehensive constitutional reforms. Against this backdrop, it is possible to conclude that MPs’ autonomy is highly curtailed. There is one relevant exception, though: the PPG cannot force an MP to resign. Ultimately, most of the crucial decisions and activity in the chamber depend on a handful of MPs, usually leaders of the central office in the extra-parliamentary party (Oñate 2000: 109). In this respect, the standing orders aim to strengthen the PPG system in the ordinary functioning of the chamber, and more generally the role of the political parties in the legislative process. Table 4.1 shows the size of parliamentary party groups in Spain from 1977 through 2016. As in Spain, PPGs in Portugal have a central role in parliament and are very much the “primary core” of its functioning (Leston-Bandeira 2004: 43).

Table 4.1  Parliamentary party groups in the Spanish lower chamber (N = 350)

Parliamentary party groups Const I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII

1977 1979 1982 1986 1989 1993 1996 2000 2004 2008 2011 2015 2016

Centrist (UCD) 166 168 12 – – – – – – – – – – Socialist (PSOE) 103 98 202 184 175 159 141 125 164 169 110 89 84 Popular (AP/PP) 16 9 106 105 106 141 156 183 147 152 185 119 134 Podemos – – – – – – – – – – – 65 67 Ciudadanos – – – – – – – – – – – 40 32 Communist (PCE/IU) 20 23 – – 18 18 21 8 5 – 11 – –

Catalan (CiU) 13 9 12 18 18 17 16 15 10 10 16 8 – ERC – – – – – – – – 8 5 – 9 9 Basque (PNV) 8 7 8 6 5 5 5 7 7 6 5 6 5 Canarian – – – – – 5 5 4 3 – – – – CDS – – – 19 14 – – – – – – – – Mixed group 9 8 10 18 14 5 6 8 6 8 18 14 19 Catalan Socialists 15 17 – – – – – – – – – – – Basque Socialists – 6 – – – – – – – – – – – Andalusian – 5 – – – – – – – – – – – UPyD – – – – – – – – – – 5 – –

Source: Official data from the chamber (www.congreso.es).

Parliamentary party groups  53

Individual MPs – whether inside or out of PPGs – have a reduced role. However, as in Spain, they are not subject to a compulsory mandate and cannot be forced to resign. MPs that relinquish their group are not allowed to change their parliamentary group. While the overall pattern is similar, the Portuguese case goes much further than its Spanish neighbour regarding constitutional recognition of PPGs. As in Spain, parties are mentioned concerning the Standing Committee (art 179). However, unlike Spain, the Portuguese Constitution specifically recognises parliamentary groups (art 180). The extent of recognition of PPGs in the Portuguese Constitution is exceptional. Overall, it makes 15 references to PPGs, a number that is only exceeded by the Greek Constitution (17 references) in the 32 post-war European democracies with codified constitutions analysed by van Biezen (2012: 202). This quantitative result largely echoes other more qualitative ones, with Jiménez (1979) assessing the Portuguese Constitution as the one that “most extensively recognises” parliamentary groups in Europe. On the other hand, Portugal is also considerably more permissive than its Iberian neighbour regarding forming PPGs. Thus, any party electing at least two MPs can constitute a parliamentary group. Moreover, again unlike Spain, the Portuguese Rules of Procedure allow parties that contest elections in electoral alliances to form separate PPGs, a possibility that the Portuguese Communist Party has consistently exploited in the democratic period. However, while it is considerably easier to create a parliamentary group in Portugal than in Spain, the number of groups has been lower in Portugal. As Table 4.2 shows, a total of 11 different PPGs have existed in Portugal since democratisation, while in Spain this total is 16 (including the Mixed group). The number of PPGs in each legislature has ranged from 4 to 8 in Portugal, with an average of 5.7. In Spain, the average is 7.2, with a range of 6 to 10. The countries’ party systems largely explain this difference. Unlike Spain, Portugal never had regional parties, thus reducing PPGs to typically four/ five state-wide parties; and it has mostly avoided the collapse or emergence of relevant parties as happened in Spain with the Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD) or, more recently, with Podemos and Ciudadanos. The Portuguese Constitution not only recognises PPGs, but it also grants them extensive prerogatives that are further fleshed out in the Rules of Procedure. Indeed, the primacy of PPGs vis-à-vis individual MPs is itself a constitutional provision in Portugal, with article 180 establishing that MPs “who do not belong to any parliamentary group shall be ensured certain minimum rights and guarantees” – thus making clear that it is PPGs that have maximal rights and guarantees. The powers of parliamentary groups can be divided in three types: collective powers, that PPGs exercise conjointly; concurrent powers, that both PPGs and individual MPs have; and exclusive powers, reserved solely for PPGs.

Table 4.2  Parliamentary party groups in the Portuguese chamber (N = 230 since 1991)

Parliamentary Party Groups Const I A I B II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII

1975 1976 1979 1980 1983 1985 1987 1991 1995 1999 2002 2005 2009 2011 2015

PS (Partido Socialista, Socialist Party; centre-left)

116 107 74 66 101 57 60 72 112 115 96 121 97 74 86

PSD (Partido Social Democrata, Social Democrat Party, centre-right)

81 73 80 82 75 88 148 135 88 81 105 75 81 108 89

PCP (Partido Comunista Português, Portuguese Communist Party, left)

30 40 44 39 41 35 29 15 13 15 10 12 13 14 15

CDS (Centro Democrático Social, Democratic Social Centre; right)

16 42 43 46 30 22 4 5 15 15 14 12 21 24 18

BE (Bloco de Esquerda, Left Bloc; left) – – – – – – – – – 2 3 8 16 8 19

MDP (Movimento Democrático Português, Portuguese Democratic Movement; contested elections in alliance with PCP)

5 – 3 2 3 3 – – – – – – – – –

PEV (Partido Ecologista ‘Os Verdes’ – Ecologist Party ‘The Greens’; contested elections in alliance with PCP)

– – – – – – 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2

PRD (Partido Renovador Democrático, Party of Democratic Renewal; centre/centre-left)

– – – – – 45 7 – – – – – – – –

PPM (Partido Popular Monárquico, Popular Monarchic Party; contested elections in alliance with PSD and CDS)

– – 5 6 – – – – – – – – – – –

ASDI (Acção Social Democrata Independente, Independent Social Democrat Action; contested elections in alliance with PS)

– – – 4 – – – – – – – – – – –

UEDS (Left-wing Union for the Socialist Democracy; contested elections in alliance with PS)

– – – 4 – – – – – – – – – – –

No. of single deputy parties (without PPG) 2 (UDP; ADIM) 1 (UDP) 1 (UDP) 1 (UDP) – – – 1 (PSN) – – – – – – 1 (PAN)

Total MPs 250 263 250 250 250 250 250 230 230 230 230 230 230 230 230

Source: official data from the chamber (https://www.parlamento.pt/DeputadoGP/Paginas/GruposParlamentaresI.aspx; and http://app.parlamento.pt/upload/Comunicar/ Anexos/2016/N1/AR.pdf). Note: This table does not reflect MPs that left their PPG during the legislature. Information on such cases available in the Parliament website.

56  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

Regarding collective powers, the most important pertain to the Conference of Leaders, which is comprised of the leader of each parliamentary group. In this body, each party has a number of votes that is commensurate to its number of seats in the plenary.1 As Leston-Bandeira (2004: 44) notes, the Conference of Leaders is the primary internal decision-making body and sets most of parliament’s agenda. Likewise, each of the seven largest PPGs – which usually means every PPG – is represented in the Board of Administration of parliament. Concerning exclusive powers, we can identify three key areas: dismissal of governments; appointment to intra-parliamentary bodies; and agenda-­ setting. About the first, only PPGs can present a motion to reject a government’s programme. Moreover, while motions of no confidence can formally be presented either by a parliamentary group or by one-quarter of MPs, the higher hurdle of the latter option de facto limits such motions to PPGs. As for the second area, virtually all legislative bodies are appointed through PPGs. This includes parliamentary committees, both regarding their membership and chairs; parliamentary delegations; parliamentary friendship groups; and parliament’s Standing Committee (Fernandes 2016). It also embraces the Assembly’s Bureau, formally the highest body in Parliament, with only PPGs able to propose candidates. Finally, PPGs also have some exclusive powers regarding setting the parliamentary order of business and summoning ministers to parliament. As for concurrent powers, the most salient pertain legislative initiative. Unlike Spain, both individual MPs and PPGs can introduce bills and amendments. However, the rules for voting bills reflect the subordination of MPs to their PPGs. In the usual form of voting, each PPG’s official line is attributed a number of votes equal to its number of MPs (regardless of MPs’ presence in parliament), minus the votes of individual MPs that vote differently from the official line. This has yielded situations where a bill is rejected (or approved) even though the majority of MPs in the chamber voted in favour (or against) it (Marujo 2018).

Internal functioning of PPGs and relation with individual MPs

This section analyses the internal structure and organisation of PPGs and how they interact with individual MPs. We do so by examining the rules that govern their internal organisation, again looking into formal structures and non-codified institutionalised practices. In general terms, PPGs in both countries have adopted highly hierarchical structures and patterns of ­behaviour similar to the mainstream parties in other European democracies. Some peculiarities show the influence of party politics in their organisation. In Spain, beside the parliament’s standing orders, the internal functioning of PPGs is defined by the groups’ internal rules, although it is not compulsory to have them. Some parties – like PSOE, PP or Ciudadanos – have produced formal internal regulations, while other (like Podemos or the

Parliamentary party groups  57

regionalist groups in the lower chamber) rely on party statutes and informal procedures.2 Overall, the chamber’s standing orders set the primary scheme of organisation, which is afterwards developed by PPGs according to internal party rules and orientations. The basic common structure that all PPGs use distinguishes four actors: the plenary (composed by all the members of the group); the board, including the main group offices (president, secretary general, whose label and number depend on the party); the groups’ spokesman; and some members responsible for coordination and control of the various areas in which the group is organised. The party leader holds the presidency within the group, delegates the function of spokesperson in another member. This one is the main responsible for the organisation of the other internal bodies and members, and the implementation of the decisions made by the PPG’s board. This board reflects the translation of the party leadership into the PPG, an aspect further elaborated in Section ‘Relations established with the ­extra-parliamentary party organisation’ below. Indeed, despite the PPG’s plenary being usually considered as the formal selector of these leading internal positions, actually it is the party which designates who will be in the PPG’s board. Only in some rare occasions does the party leadership differ from the group. On the one hand, there have been situations where a change in the central office after an election promoted as a party leader someone without a seat in the chamber. This was the case of Antonio Hernández Mancha in AP (Alianza Popular, Popular Alliance) between 1987 and 1989, while he was a senator. Recently, Pedro Sánchez became the PSOE leader again after winning the party primary unexpectedly in May 2017, some months after resigning as a party leader and as an MP. In both cases, this situation has fostered some internal problems and paved the way to present a vote of no-confidence to the executive in order to give parliamentary visibility to the extra-parliamentarian leader in the opposition. On the other hand, the regionalist groups tend to be represented by delegates of the party board, while the main leaders stay in the regional parliament (or the regional executive). This has been the case, for instance, of the Catalan (CiU) and the Basque (PNV) groups, which behave as agents of the principal (usually the regional prime minister). In this case, the linkage between the PPG and the extra-parliamentary party becomes more intense (Oñate 2000). Finally, those PPGs composed of two or more parties or coalitions have a more complex configuration at the top of the group. Indeed, the ‘confederal’ PPG of Podemos, its allies and United Left does not have a formal internal regulation, and the main decisions are made among the central offices of the extra-parliamentary organisations. This informal decision-making can produce the exclusion of the minor components of the PPG in important parliamentary decisions, as has happened with Anova, the smallest member of the Podemos PPG.3

58  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

The party constitutions state the principle of obeisance to PPGs’ members, whose actions are under the supervision of the group’s leaders. In this respect, the main disciplinary procedures to keep party cohesion under control include fines, a downgrade in parliamentary offices and threats of expulsion from the PPG. The amount of a fine for disobeying the PPG’s voting orders can fluctuate among different groups (100–600 euros in the PP, 200–600 euros in the PSOE, 600–900 euros in Ciudadanos, but no fee established in Podemos yet). The use of fines is not exceptional, although the lack of discipline is often related to individual votes for ethic motivations, rather than the political division of the group. The primary examples of deep indiscipline in the PPG happened with the UCD and AP in the first years of the democratic period. The more relevant one in recent times was the decision of 15 PSOE parliamentarians to oppose the party’s decision to vote in favour of Mariano Rajoy as a prime minister in October 2016. They were penalised with a fine, and some of them sacked from PPG responsibilities. The more effective procedure to ensure discipline is the risk of not being included in the electoral list in the following election, as the party board completely controls these lists. In the case of parliamentary groups in Portugal, the only formal organisational requirement set in the Rules of Procedure is that they have a president. Beyond this, each PPG can decide how it is structured. Examining the five main parties, there is significant variation in how their PPGs are formalised. In the case of the PS, PSD and CDS, the parliamentary groups are formally recognised in the party statutes and have their internal regulations (although these are not publicly available). The situation is different in the Communist Party and the Left Bloc. These two parties give significantly less formal importance to the parliamentary groups, and they are formally subordinated to the extra-parliamentary party. In both cases, the PPGs officeholders are appointed by the party rather than elected by MPs (Leston-Bandeira 2009: 699; Lopes 2015), making these PPGs considerably less autonomous in formal terms than those of PS, PSD and CDS. In practice, all PPGs have not only a president, but also vice-presidents, with the number varying according to the size of the parliamentary group and to the party.4 Party leaders who are MPs do not take up positions at the helm of the parliamentary group. However, as in Spain, the PPG leadership is closely aligned with the party leadership. Thus, while the PPGs of PS, PSD and CDS elect their presidents, it is rare for an election to be contested by more than one candidate; and the PPG board requires the de facto confidence of the party leadership to endure. The coexistence between party leaders and PPGs can be tense after a change in the party leadership, when a new party leader has to coexist with a parliamentary group he did not choose, and with MPs that often hail from a different internal faction. The PSD after the election of Rui Rio in 2018 is the most recent example of such tensions, though it is far from being an isolated case. However, these tensions rarely boil over into open rebellion, and the party leader usually prevails.

Parliamentary party groups  59

As in Spain, the most striking instances of internal dissension occurred in the early phase of democratisation. Since the mid-1980s, there have been only five MPs that left their PPG, becoming independent MPs. Of these, only one was a consequential departure: that of a CDS MP in 1999, casting the deciding vote in favour of the Socialist government’s budget, against his party’s orientation. Three factors disincentivise such departures. First, party statutes: parties establish MPs allegiance to the party’s orientation, although in Portugal sanctions are disciplinary rather than fines. Second, the closed-list proportional representation electoral system, allowing the party leadership to exclude recalcitrant MPs from subsequent elections. Third, the parliamentary Rules of Procedure, which severely limit what an independent MP can do. These three factors also strengthen voting discipline in parliament. The general perception is that voting discipline is almost absolute in the Portuguese parliament (Braga da Cruz 1988). However, voting dissent does exist in Portugal, with between 5 and 44 votes having internal dissent per legislature from 1976 through 1999 (Leston-Bandeira 2009). In total, the number of MPs dissenting from the party line ranged from 12 to 104 per legislature over this period, with dissent being more common in the PSD (54 votes with dissent) and PS (53 votes) than in the CDS (7 votes), while Portuguese Communist Party (PCP) MPs always toed the party line (Leston-Bandeira 2009: 706–707).5

Examining the available data from 2009 to 2018, we find that dissent continues to be present.6 Once again, dissent is more frequent in the PS, PSD, and CDS-PP than in the PCP, with the BE echoing the Communist Party’s pattern. In the case of the PCP, dissent continues to be entirely absent; while the BE has only two MPs that have voted against the party line (out of 56 seats since 1999), both in the current legislature. This contrasts with the case of the PS (225 MPs have dissented over these three legislatures); PSD (147 MPs); and CDS (59 MPs), and is consistent with the pattern of weaker autonomy of the parliamentary groups of PCP and BE noted in the previous section. The data also show dissent to be generally higher among MPs that are not party members. Finally, dissent appears to be on the rise. In the 2009–2011 legislature, 87 MPs voted against their party’s line, with a total of 243 votes against the party. In the 2011–2015 legislature, these numbers rise to 175 and 1955, respectively; and, in the 2015–2018 period, the numbers are 173 MPs and 2406 votes. In part, this increase in dissent may reflect a change in the Socialist Party, which relaxed voting discipline for its MPs from 2011 onwards (Lisi 2015: 58). The PS saw its share of dissenting MPs increase from 48 per cent in the 11th legislature (2009–2011) to 57 per cent in the current 13th legislature (2005–2018), even though both have a minority Socialist government in power. At the same time, it should be emphasised that such dissent is still largely inconsequential: majorities are almost invariably determined by how the PPGs define their vote, despite such instances of dissent.

60  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

Resources

In this section, we present the resources provided to PPGs. The main focus is on finance, but we also consider other resources provided to the groups. These include traditional formal resources (e.g. personnel, space); and more modern resources (e.g. website space and other digital communication tools). Spanish PPGs have increasingly received financial assistance from the chamber’s budget since the beginning of the democratic period. The parliamentary group was the first source of party public funding established after the first democratic election when the provisional chamber’s rules set up internal subsidies to sustain the activities of the PPGs. Some years later the party finance law included parliamentary subsidies as one of the leading public sources for party funding, although in the last years, the economic crisis of the last decade reduced the total amount of the allocation. The impact of parliamentary subsidies on the main parties’ finance has remained stable, meaning the 8–6 per cent of the total incomes (as shown in ­Figure 4.1), even if the proportion of party revenues from national institutions have declined because of the increasing local and regional public allocations (Bértoa et al. 2014).

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Million €

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Years

Total (millions €) PP (%) PSOE (%)

Figure 4.1  Party finance from national PPGs (both chambers) in Spain. Source: Own elaboration from official data (Court of Audit). Note: Columns shows the amount of parliamentary subsidies for all the PPGs in millions of euros. Lines show the proportion of parliamentary funding among total party income for both PP and PSOE.

Parliamentary party groups  61

The parliamentary allocation is distributed among the PPGs according to two criteria: a fixed amount for each group, and a variable allocation proportional to the seats decided by the Board of the chamber. The central party office manages these economic resources with very few restrictions. They sustain the PPG activities related to the legislative tasks, but can also be dedicated to the extra-parliamentary party activities. The Spanish Court of Audit generically scrutinises the supervision of these funds. An additional economic source comes from the contributions made by the MPs extracted from their parliamentary salaries, based on the proportion decided by the party board (Pauner Chulvi 2010). MPs’ salaries are usually received in the party bank account, and it is up to the party organisation to decide how to distribute them among the PPG members. Interestingly, Ciudadanos’ statutes say that the party will provide additional economic funds to the PPG if the subsidies received by the chamber are not enough to develop its activity. Staff working for the MPs are funded by the chambers’ budget separately from the party allocations. The amount of personal resources is also decided at the beginning of the term, and distributed proportionally among the different PPGs. In 2016, up to 250 staff members were assigned to the MPs, at the cost of 7.5 million euros.7 These employees are appointed by the PPG’s spokesperson and are usually focused on the legislative job, but they can also work on extra-parliamentary tasks. The infrastructures assigned to the PPG have been increasing over the years, with the construction of new buildings around the parliament. Digital resources are, however, still in the process of development. The PPGs’ web portals are still embedded in the general party websites and are mostly dedicated to providing information about the background of the representatives, and some general diffusion of the parliamentary initiatives.8 Similarly, the presence of PPGs in social networks is always subordinated to the party image, despite groups like the PSOE, Ciudadanos and the PP having their own Twitter account. In this respect, the interaction with citizens in social networks is instead developed by individual MPs, particularly Twitter and Facebook. As in Spain, public funding plays a central role in party finances in Portugal. Funding has always been primarily tied to parliamentary representation since the inception of public subventions in 1977. However, the usage of this funding by parties reflects the subordination of the PPG to the ­extra-parliamentary party, with parliamentary subventions often used for general party tasks. The first public funding to parties was included in the Organic Law of the Assembly of the Republic (Law 32/77), granting an annual subvention to each party represented in Parliament; and the relevant article also established that the funding was so parties could “carry out their objectives, namely those of a parliamentary nature”. However, this latter proviso was largely ignored by the parties, with this subvention becoming another element of their general budget.

62  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

Funding underwent two significant changes since 1977. The first is that, from 1998 on, this subvention was extended to parties not represented in parliament that gained more than 50,000 votes (a condition that was met once, in the 2011 elections); and it also lost the formal requirement that the fund be aimed at parties’ parliamentary work. The second is that, with law 77/88 of 1988, another source of funding was added, specifically tied to parliamentary representation, with each PPG being entitled to an annual subvention. As per the first subvention, in this case also the monopoly of PPGs was subsequently relaxed: from 2010 onwards (Law 55/2010), this subvention was extended to MPs outside of a PPG. Formally, this funding is for “costs of support [encargos de assessoria] for MPs”. In practice, however, this funding has also become an additional source of party income rather than specifically aimed or delimited to providing support for MPs. In addition to these funds, PPGs have also been entitled to support staff. The number of staff to be hired is limited by an amount that depends on the number of MPs. This ends up being the largest source of funding for the PPGs: out of just over 9.5 million euros received by PPGs in 2016, 89 per cent were to pay for staff. As subventions are granted based against a set figure, the total received by PPGs is relatively stable over time. Parliamentary groups are free to set wages and use their amount for staff as they choose. As such, the number of staff varies across years and parties (see Figure 4.2). As can be seen, the number of staff is close to the number of MPs, and in recent years often exceeds this number. On average, from 2006 to 2016, the ratio of staff to MPs is 1:1, which would allow each MP to have his own staff. However, in practice, the majority of MPs do not have their own staff. Once again, the pattern is one of prevalence of the extra-parliamentary party over the PPG. The PPG staff funds are frequently used to pay general party staff rather than specific staff of the parliamentary group and MPs. As the former president of the legal body that oversees party accounts put it, this funding for parliamentary staff has become “a means for financing parties” (quoted in Davim 2018: 51). Concerning MPs salaries, unlike Spain, these are paid directly to the individual MPs. Only in the case of the PCP are MPs formally expected to give the party the difference between their salary as an MP and their previous salary. Regarding digital tools, all PPGs have the possibility of having a page on Parliament’s website. The actual usage of this possibility is correlated to the degree of formal independence of the PPGs. All three parties – PS, PSD and CDS – that have formally independent PPGs have this page within the parliament’s website. Inversely, PCP and BE do not have these pages, instead hosting the online presence of their parliamentary group solely on their party website or on a separate website, albeit linked to the party website, which is consistent with the pattern of formal subordination of their PPGs to the party.

Parliamentary party groups  63

Relations established with the extra-parliamentary party organisation

In this section, we examine how PPGs interact with the extra-parliamentary party organisation. We do so by analysing how formal party statutes establish relations between the PPGs and the party-as-a-whole and then examining the dynamics of these relations in the two countries. Spanish political parties have become highly parliamentarised organisations (Sánchez de Dios 1999) in that daily decision-making has been transferred to PPGs at both national and regional levels. However, it does not mean that the PPG have gained autonomy vis-à-vis the extra-­parliamentary party organisation because all parties’ constitutions impose a strong subordination of the MPs to the party decisions, as was shown previously. For the PP, the PPG is an instrument for the party’s political action in the institutions. Likewise, PSOE, Ciudadanos and Podemos have similar rules. Moreover, the existing overlap between the party and parliamentary leadership strengthens this dependence link in all political parties. Hence, the PPG boards are designed by the party headquarters, and the parliamentary

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

Number of Parliamentary Group Staff

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Years

PS PSD PCP BE CDS Others

Figure 4.2  Number of staff per PPG in Portugal, 1995–2016. Source: Own elaboration from official data (Relatórios de Gerência da Assembleia da República).

64  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

spokesman is usually a member of the party board ex officio. When the party comes to the government, the PPG subordination increases, as part of the party elite shifts from the parliament to the executive. The personal overlap between both arenas makes the parliamentary leadership highly dependent on the internal evolution of the extra-parliamentary party: a change in the party leader leads ineluctably to a change in the PPG board. This has been the case in the recent political reshuffles occurred after the party conferences in the main forces. The resignation of Pedro Sánchez as PSOE’s secretary general produced a complete reshuffle of the PPG board in October 2016, which was changed again some months later when Sánchez won the primary election for the party leadership. The fall of Mariano Rajoy after being sacked from the government through a vote of no-confidence produced a party leadership replacement that extended later to the PPG. In Podemos, the realignment of the balance among factions in the 2017 conference (Vistalegre II) also brought significant changes to the board composition. Ultimately, party instability has been the primary source of conflict and lack of discipline within the PPGs. In this respect, the first years of the democratic period showed how the party internal opposition could challenge the national leaders through the PPG, as it happened with UCD and AP, whose MPs were divided according to party factions (Oñate 2000). Similar to Spain, the party in public office has a central role in Portugal (Jalali 2007). Indeed, van Biezen’s (2003: 218) description of party organisations “controlled from a small centre of power located at the interstices of the extra-parliamentary party and the party in public office” largely holds, with the notable exception of the Communist Party. However, while the party in public office is essential, the PPG is not the locus of internal power in Portuguese parties. For the national party organisation, the critical public offices are at government level; and for the sub-national party structures, these are the municipal executives. Rank-and-file MPs hold comparatively little sway within the party. Moreover, while a PPG president and its board will be relevant within the party organisation, this importance is mostly by virtue of having the party leader’s trust rather than from having the support of MPs. Overall, then, the pattern is one of subordination of the PPG to the party leadership – a pattern that is consistent with the previous analysis concerning how PPGs operate internally and use their funds. Formally, the PPG is recognised as a national body of the party in the statutes of the PS, PSD and CDS. In all three cases, the PPG president is also a member ex officio of the executive committees of the party. Again, the main line of difference is between these three parties and their counterparts to the left, PCP and BE. The latter do not recognise the PPG as a body of the party. The Left Bloc mentions its national and European parliamentary groups in the statutes, but only to clarify which national party body oversees them. As for the Communist Party, there is no mention of the PPG at all, with its statutes only specifying that elected officeholders of the party must act according to the party’s orientations.

Parliamentary party groups  65

As in Spain, the selection of the PPG leadership is carefully articulated with the party leadership, and a PPG leader needs to have the trust of the party leader. Thus, while the PSD, CDS and PS establish the PPG as an independent body, changes in the party leadership invariably entail a change in the PPG leadership if the latter is not aligned with the former. The most recent instance of this situation took place in the PSD. In the aftermath of the leadership election of Rui Rio to the party’s leadership in January 2018, the president of the PPG – who had been elected to the role in July 2017 – was forced to resign, after having backed Rio’s opponent in the internal leadership election. While the erstwhile leader of the PPG was willing to continue in the role under the new leadership, he is reported to have conceded that “although the PSD’s parliamentary group is an autonomous body, no president of the parliamentary group can endure against the party president’s wish” (Lusa 2018).

Relations between PPGs and the executive

In this section, we examine how PPGs are involved in the process of government both formally and informally. We do so across two dimensions: government formation and survival; and government operation. In Spain, the leaders of the parliamentary groups are intensively involved in the process of government formation, although they participate as party leaders rather than parliamentary actors. The central party office formally approves the PPG’s decision on presenting or supporting a candidate for the investitures as PM. Paradoxically, the PPGs are less visible in the process when the party is in the cabinet. For instance, the PSOE’s statute defines its PPG as the parliamentary support when the party rules the government and must report regularly to the party office about its activity. Traditionally, there are have been two additional constraints to the role of the PPGs in the cabinet building process. First, the parliamentary group does not operate as a springboard to the cabinet, since Spain is one of the parliamentary democracies in Western Europe with less amount of parliamentary cabinet ministers (Rodríguez Teruel 2011). Second, in situations of minority government, both PSOE and PP have preferred to negotiate the parliamentary support with regionalist parties, which are policy-seeking at the national level and office-seeking at the regional level (Field 2016). Thus, the statewide parties have built this kind of multilevel exchanges by making agreements at the party elite level and setting aside their PPGs. However, recent changes in the party system have altered this pattern, as the old big parties now need to build parliamentary majorities with the new PPGs, although these new parties have preferred so far to negotiate policy concessions instead of entering the cabinet. In this context, it is particularly important the role of those junior ministers or general directors assuming the function of liaison between the executive and the parliamentary committees. They become one of the main channels of influence and

66  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

information for the PPGs – particularly those at the opposition – about the policy agenda of the government. The Spanish PPGs have two types of resources to develop policy analysis seeking influence on the policy-making at the parliamentary level: internal services provided to the standing committees of parliament, and parliamentary groups, and external services and expertise provided by political organisations and experts. It is the limits of such resources that constrains the extent of influence of PPGs, which have not achieved a stable pattern of participation in the process of policy-making (Maurer 2008). Consequently, as the influence of the individual MPs on the policy agenda is somewhat limited, the interest groups tend to focus on the party leaders and the PPG board in order to gain effectiveness in the process (Caballero Miguez 2007). In this respect, the internal hierarchy in the PPGs and the strong party discipline increases the cost of individual transactions among parliamentarians and hinders the chances to achieve policy agreements without the consent of the PPG leaders (Caballero Miguez 2007). The result is meagre effectiveness of the parliamentary opposition to pass private member’s bill, in opposition to the high amount of government bills approved, even in minority situations. In Portugal, the fact that PPG leaders are generally not in the party leadership constitutes a significant difference from Spain. As such, PPGs generally have a weak level of involvement in the process of government formation, taking a backseat role to the party leadership. This weakness of PPGs within parties is compounded by the rules of the parliamentary investiture vote. The Portuguese case is characterised by Cheibub, Martin and Rasch (2015) as a relatively weak investiture vote, with parliament’s influence reasonably limited. The investiture vote is ex post, with parliament solely able to vote on the President’s appointed government; and it requires a negative absolute majority to topple the government, leading to a new round again initiated by a presidential appointment (or dissolution). The significant differences with Spain are that the investiture by the Congreso is ex ante, a characteristic that is considered stronger by Cheibub, Martin and Rasch (2015); and it requires a simple majority rule if an absolute majority is not achieved in the first round. Typically, government formation is amply settled well in advance of any involvement of the PPGs, either because the elections produce a clear mandate for a single party; or the party leadership negotiates a post-electoral coalition government. Only twice has the parliamentary vote of investiture rejected a government: in 1978, when the parties blocked one of President Eanes’ non-partisan “governments of presidential inspiration”; and in November 2015, when PS, PCP, BE, PEV and PAN voted down the minority coalition government of PSD-CDS, paving the way for a PS minority government with the parliamentary support of PCP, BE and PEV. While this latter case marks the highpoint of parliamentary intervention in government formation, it also reveals the limitations of the PPGs. While some members of the PPG boards were generally in the negotiating teams between these parties, which ultimately resulted in formal agreements, their position was a reflection of the trust the party leader had in them rather than arising

Parliamentary party groups  67

from their role within the PPG. Moreover, the ultimate decisions regarding these deals were taken by the party leadership rather than the PPGs. Regarding government survival, the main difference from Spain is that Portugal does not require a constructive motion of no confidence, unlike its Iberian neighbour. On paper, this should strengthen the role of PPGs in terms of its ability to dismiss governments. In practice, however, the effect is minimal. Motions of no confidence are considerably more frequent in Portugal than in Spain. Every legislature in Portugal bar one (the 7th legislature, 1995–1999) has had at least one such motion; and there have been 30 such motions since the first legislature of 1976, 20 of which occurred from 2000 to 2017 (Leston-Bandeira and Fernandes 2015). This contrasts with the Spanish case, with only four such motions since democratisation. However, while the number of motions is much higher in Portugal, the ultimate impact on government survival is identical, with only one motion succeeding in Portugal (in 1987) and in Spain (2018). Concerning policy influence, the subordination of PPGs to the party leadership noted in previous sections is also evident here. In the specific case of the political forces in the executive, this means that the party in government prevails over the PPG, as the party leadership is concentrated in the former, with the member of government for parliamentary affairs playing a pivotal role in linking government and PPG. At the same time, it should be noted that the overall role of PPGs in policy is also dependent on the type of government. In single-party majority governments, the influence of the party in government is higher than in coalition governments or minority governments. In the latter, the opposition can also push through policy, and governments are obliged to negotiate across party aisles, making parliament a more important arena for policy formulation (Moury and Fernandes 2018; Leston-Bandeira 2004: 28, 86).

Conclusion

This chapter has compared the main features of the PPGs in the national lower chambers of Portugal and Spain. Both countries have typical patterns of historical evolution of parliamentary democracies, which conditioned the institutionalisation of PPGs negatively until democratisation. However, these groups have quickly developed during these four decades of democracy. The main feature in both countries is the strong link between political parties and PPGs that subordinates the groups to the extra-parliamentary organisation. Although this is a feature shared with the rest of parliaments in democratic Europe, these cases show a particularly high degree of dependence of the groups on the party decision-making, which deeply erodes the role of the individual MPs deeply. The analysis has found some factors that influence the extent of fluctuation of the powers of the PPGs in Spain. On the one hand, the multilevel dimension in Spanish politics has altered the traditional role of the national PPGs in the policy agenda. Subnational institutions have gained a greater autonomy to make policies, reducing the power of the national parliament. Moreover, the particular strategies adopted by regionalist parties (­policy-seeking at the national level, office-seeking at the regional level)

68  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

allows them to keep a vital degree of capacity to negotiate with the national government, to the detriment of the parliamentary groups in the chamber. On the other hand, the rise of new parties has also altered the internal dynamic of national parliaments. The increasing fragmentation of the chamber and the high replacement of MPs in the last years could have renewed the powers of the chamber against the government, although it has simultaneously eroded the capacity to achieve agreements and thus precluded a greater role for PPGs in policy-making. While PPGs are considerably easier to form in Portugal than in Spain, the number of parliamentary groups has been lower in Portugal, a reflection of the comparative absence of a multilevel dimension and a generally more stable party system. Overall, PPGs in Portugal have a double life in political terms. On the one hand, parliamentary groups overwhelmingly prevail over individual MPs, with the formal rules – not least in the Constitution – making PPGs, rather than MPs, the critical political actor within Parliament. Indeed, this is reflected in how voting takes place: MPs that are absent do not reduce a parliamentary group’s numbers in a parliamentary vote. On the other hand, PPGs play a secondary role to the extra-parliamentary party and, in particular, to the party leadership, even if several parties grant their PPGs formal autonomy. At the same time, as this chapter has noted, this matryoshka-like ­pattern – of MPs subordinated to the PPGs, which in turn are subservient to their parties – is not identical across all parties. In particular, a distinction emerges between the PS, PSD and CDS, on the one hand; and PCP and BE, on the other hand. The latter have much more cohesive and disciplined PPGs than the former and grant their parliamentary groups considerably less formal autonomy. Interestingly, this distinction between PPGs mirrors a line of separation that structured the Portuguese party system until 2015, with PCP and BE excluded from national government. The post-2015 ‘contraption’ – a minority Socialist government that has the unprecedented support of PCP and BE to form a government and in key policy instruments, such as the state budget – has eroded some of this historical divide, at least temporarily. With the post-2015 legislature potentially marking an inflexion point in the Portuguese party system, it will be interesting to see how such a change percolates through to the PPGs in the future.

Acknowledgement

This research was supported by the Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation (FCT), as part of the “Into the ‘secret garden’ of Portuguese politics: parliamentary candidate selection in Portugal, 1976–2015” project (PTDC/CPO-CPO/30296/2017).

Notes

1 The Government can also be represented in the Conference of Leaders, though it cannot intervene in matters that are exclusively related to Parliament.

Parliamentary party groups  69

2 However, Podemos has approved a common framework of rules to set the internal organisation and the functions in the regional parliaments. 3 Eldiario.es (2018): “Un sector de En Marea acusa a Unidos Podemos de ningunear a sus diputados en el Congreso”, 6-3-2018 (accessed in 25-7-2018: www.eldiario.es/ politica/Marea-funcionamiento-Unidos-Podemos-Congreso_0_747175603.html). 4 In early October 2018, the PS had 11 vice-presidents, with the PSD having seven, the CDS having three and the PCP and BE each having two. The PSD was the only party to have secretaries in its PPG. 5 These numbers, from Leston-Bandeira (2009), exclude votes where more than ten MPs dissented. 6 Own calculations based on data from the Hemiciclo website’s índice de desealinhamento, available online at http://hemiciclo.pt/desalinhamento, consulted on 12 October 2018. 7 Parliamentary resolution 2016/30 of the Board of the Permanent Deputation. 8 The PP group has developed a specific website with a permanent update of the PPG activities. Although most of this information is already in the general party website, there are additional data like the formal internal structure of the group (www.gppopular.es). On the contrary, the PSOE has only developed an intranet independently from the party website.

References

Aldrich, J. H. (1995). Why Parties?: The Origin and Transformation of Political Parties in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Bértoa, F. C., Rodríguez-Teruel, J., Barberà, O., and Barrio, A. (2014). “The Carrot and the Stick: Party Regulation and Politics in Democratic Spain.” South European Society and Politics 19 (1): 89–112. van Biezen, I. (2003). Political Parties in New Democracies: Party Organisation in Southern and East-Central Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. van Biezen, I. (2012). “Constitutionalizing Party Democracy: The Constitutive Codification of Political Parties in Post-War Europe.” British Journal of Political Science 42 (1): 187–212. Braga da Cruz, M. (1988). “Sobre o Parlamento português: partidarização parlamentar e parlamentarização partidária.” Análise Social 24 (100): 97–125. Caballero Miguez, G. (2007) “Comisiones, grupos parlamentarios y diputados en la gobernanza del Congreso de los Diputados.” Revista de Estudios Políticos 135: 67–107. Cheibub, J. A., Martin, S., and Rasch, B. E. (2015). “Government Selection and Executive Powers: Constitutional Design in Parliamentary Democracies.” West European Politics 38 (5): 969–996. Davim, M. (2018). “O caso dos assessores-fantasma.” Sábado, September 13. Fernandes, J. M. (2016). “Intra-party Delegation in the Portuguese Legislature: Assigning Committee Chairs and Party Coordination Positions.” The Journal of Legislative Studies 22 (1): 108–128. Field, B. N. (2016). Why Minority Governments Work. Multilevel Territorial Politics in Spain. London: Palgrave Macmillan. Heidar, K. M. and Koole, R. (2000). “Approaches to the Study of Parliamentary Party Groups,” in Knut, H. and R. Koole (eds.) Parliamentary Party Groups in European Democracies: Political Parties Behind Closed Doors. Abingdon: Routledge, 4–22. Jalali, C. (2007). Partidos e democracia em Portugal, 1974–2005: da revolução ao bipartidarismo. Lisbon: Imprensa de Ciências Sociais.

70  Carlos Jalali and Juan Rodríguez Teruel

Jiménez, M. R. (1979). “Teoría y práctica del grupo parlamentario.” Revista de estudios políticos 11: 5–36. Katz, R. S., and Mair, P. (1993). “The Evolution of Party Organizations in Europe: The Three Faces of Party Organization.” American Review of Politics 14 (4): 593–617. Key, V. O. (1955). Politics, Parties, and Pressure Groups. New York: Crowell Leston-Bandeira, C. (2004). From Legislation to Legitimation : The Role of the Portuguese Parliament. Abingdon: Routledge. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2009). “Dissent in a Party-Based Parliament: The Portuguese Case.” Party Politics 15 (6): 695–713. Leston-Bandeira, C., and Fernandes, J. M. (2015). “Parliamentary Investiture Rules in Portugal’s Semi-Presidential Democracy,” in Rasch, B. E., Martin, S. and J. Cheibub (eds.) Parliaments and Government Formation: Unpacking Investiture Rules. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 217–232. Lisi, M. (2015). Party Change, Recent Democracies, and Portugal: Comparative Perspectives. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. Lopes, M. J. (2015). “Pedro Filipe Soares outra vez líder parlamentar, mas com 20 votos contra.” Público, October 18. www.publico.pt/2015/10/18/politica/noticia/ pedro-filipe-soares-outra-vez-lider-parlamentar-mas-com-20-votos-contra-1711615 Lusa (2018). “Rio não quer Hugo Soares na liderança da bancada do PSD. Eleições em breve.” Expresso, February 14. https://expresso.sapo.pt/politica/2018-02-14Rio-nao-quer-Hugo-Soares-na-lideranca-da-bancada-do-PSD.-Eleicoes-embreve Marujo, Miguel (2018). “O projeto de lei que foi rejeitado com mais votos a favor.” Diário de Notícias, January 21. www.dn.pt/portugal/interior/o-projeto-de-leique-foi-rejeitado-com-mais-votos-a-favor-9062791.html Maurer, L. M. (2008). El poder del parlamento. Congreso y políticas públicas en España. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Políticos y Constitucionales. Mayhew, D. R. (1974). Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Moury, C., and Jorge M. F. (2018). “Minority Governments and Pledge Fulfilment: Evidence from Portugal.” Government and Opposition 53 (2): 335–355. Oñate, P. (2000). “Congreso, grupos parlamentarios y partidos,” in Martínez, A. (ed.) El Congreso de los Diputados en España: funciones y rendimiento. Madrid: Tecnos, 95–140. Pauner Chulvi, C. (2010). “Parlamentarios En Un Contexto Multinivel: Las Relaciones Entre Parlamentarios, Grupos y Partidos.” Revista de Derecho Político 78: 218–256. Rodríguez Teruel, J. (2011). “Ministerial and Parliamentary Elites in Multilevel Spain 1977–2009.” Comparative Sociology 10(6): 887–907. Saiz Arnaiz, A. (1989). Los grupos parlamentarios. Madrid: Congreso de los Diputados. Saalfeld, T., and Strøm, K. W. (2014). “Political Parties and Legislators,” in Martin, S., Saalfeld, T. and K. Strøm (eds.) Oxford Handbook of Legislative Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 371–398. Sánchez de Dios, M. (1999). “Parliamentary Party Discipline in Spain,” in Bowler, S., Farrell, D. and R. Katz (eds.) Party Discipline and Parliamentary Government. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 141–166.

Introduction

Legislative committees are the workhorses of efficient parliaments. LaPolambora highlights that “if the national legislature is to be a significant political actor, then it must have specialized committees of limited membership and considerable scope” (1974: 123). Together with political parties, committees offer the organizational arena to aggregate preferences, curb transaction costs and facilitate information acquisition and dissemination (Strøm 1998). According to Sartori, committees are optimal decision-­making bodies because they “shun majority rule, seek unanimous agreements via internal deferred payments, and adjust to the outer world, or incorporate its demands, via side payments” (1987: 236). The study of committees has a long tradition in American politics. The three theories of legislative organization – distributional (Shepsle 1978), informational (Krehbiel 1991) and partisan (Cox and McCubbins 1993) – constitute a sophisticated and fertile field. The last decade witnessed an explosion in the number of scholarly works devoted to committees beyond the US Congress.1 For example, work on the German Bundestag explores how electoral system incentives shape committee assignments (Gschwend and Zittel 2018). In Ireland and Denmark, Hansen (2010, 2011) finds that, except for expertise, there is not a clearly defined pattern in assignments. Yordanova (2011) shows that expertise plays a significant role in the ­European Parliament. With a few exceptions (Fernandes 2016; Fernandes et al 2018; Riera and Cantú 2018), committee systems in Iberian legislatures remain largely overlooked in the international literature. The primary goal of this chapter is to fill in this gap in committee literature. Specifically, we have two goals. First, we aim to map the critical indicators of committee organization and powers in Portugal and Spain. Second, we seek to examine the singularities in the evolution of the committee system in the two legislatures since democratization in the 1970s. The chapter proceeds as follows. First, we discuss some of the critical dimensions of committee organization, using stylized propositions derived from the US literature. This section aims to present several indicators employed in the previous literature, against which we later compare our two

5 Committee systems in Portugal and Spain

Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

72  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

cases. Second, we adopt a historical approach to the evolution of committee systems in Portugal and Spain. Third, we display data on the dimensions identified in the first section. Finally, we conclude the chapter by highlighting the main similarities and differences of the committee systems of the two parliaments under study.

Committee systems in legislatures

Over the past decade, committee systems in European legislatures have benefited from a growing interest among comparative legislative scholars. Most of this literature, however, has focused almost exclusively on the politics of assignment (Hansen 2011; Fernandes 2016; Mickler 2018; Fernandes et  al. 2018). We draw on this body of scholarly work to establish several institutional and behavioural assumptions for this chapter. First, MPs are reelection-­seeking political actors, whose decisions and actions aim at maximizing their chances of regaining their seat (Mayhew 1974). Second, political parties have a pivotal role in the organization of the delegation of power from voters to elected officials. In Müller’s formulation, in parliamentary democracies, “no one would seriously consider any alternative to political parties as the most important political coordination mechanism” (2000: 316). Third, the inter-connected relationship between the legislature and the executive creates an environment in which “professional advancement and policy influence [are] a single indivisible good controlled by the party leadership” (Kam 2009: 26). Fourth, electoral rules have an impact on legislative organization. MPs operating in systems with low incentives to cultivate a personal vote will be spurred to become party-centred (Carey and Shugart 1995). The institutional environment in Iberian legislatures generates “centripetal” incentives for MPs to put parties first if they want to achieve reselection, reelection, meet their policy goals and, above all, maximize their political power in the chamber. Importantly, Portugal and Spain have a closed-list proportional electoral system whose rules make the party the central unit. MPs have few, if any, incentives to cultivate a personal vote.2 Instead, the legislature and the national party are the arenas in which they need to deliver to gain reelection. Against this institutional and behavioural background, we turn onto Strøm’s (1998) work on European committees, in which this author articulates an array of empirical indicators that help us map the structure and powers of committees in legislative decision-making across countries. This classification scheme has been extensively used in comparative literature (for a review see Martin and Mickler 2018), which helps us to situate Portugal and Spain in the general European context. In what follows, we discuss those indicators.

Committee structure

Committees are highly heterogeneous institutions. Their structure varies not only across, but also within, countries, as actors reshape committees’

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  73

structure to maximize their benefits. Strøm (1998) focuses on six criteria to map the structure of committee systems in European parliamentary and semipresidential democracies. First, several types of committees exist, and they differ in tenure – that is, they have different functions and duration. Mostly, if we focus on tenure, committees can be divided between permanent and ad hoc. Typically, the latter have a circumscribed duration and object. Legislative actors decide to create a committee with a specific ­object – for example, to conduct an inquiry into a scandal – that will terminate at the end of its work. Permanent committees have a continuing existence over legislative terms. Concerning types, Strøm (1998) distinguishes between law-­making committees, specialized committees and non-law-making committees. Second, the number of committees is of great importance if one wants to understand the institutional capacity of the committee system. Indeed, a higher number of committees is associated with more institutional arenas for specialization and also heightens the capacity to deal with more workload simultaneously. Third, committee size matters for the efficient functioning of these structures. According to Verba (1961), committee size is what makes them an optimal decision-making arena for it enables expertise acquisition. There is a curvilinear effect in the relationship between size and efficiency. Indeed, if committees are too small, they will not be useful in that they will not allow for the inclusion of enough members to digest information and deliver benefits to the parties. Fourth, jurisdictional arrangements are essential to understanding property rights and whether the committee structure mimics executive organization. To be sure, the latter matters to heighten oversight capacities of the executive branch, which is particularly vital in coalition government contexts (Carroll and Cox 2012). Furthermore, well-defined and stable jurisdictions promote active specialization, mainly when MPs serve for several terms in the same committee. Fifth, multiple membership restrictions are essential to understanding whether rules promote specialization. MPs face time and capacity constraints. If they need to sit on multiple committees, their capacity to acquire and disseminate specialized knowledge is curbed. In principle, multiple membership restrictions will depend on legislative size. Finally, subcommittees play an important role in the functioning of committees because they permit for further specialization by asking a subset of committee members to deal with a specific topic. Crucially, in parliamentary democracies, subcommittees are the arena where membership hinges on self-selection. We note, however, that, although subcommittees promote further specialization, they also heighten transaction costs in decision-­ making because they add a further layer of complexity.

Committee procedures

Committee procedures are intimately linked to legislative organization. Herein, we focus on five dimensions identified by Strøm (1998). First, we

74  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

study committee assignments – that is, the process through which members gain access to committees. In parliamentary democracies, political parties are the gatekeepers to these positions, which are distributed based on the size of the party delegation on the floor (Rasch 2009). Committee assignments have been subject to intense examination in the literature if anything because delegating power to the best agent in each arena would minimize moral hazard and hidden information problems. Thus, political parties need to be cautious about whom they assign to committees. In most countries, seniority and party loyalty are essential factors in the screening of candidates. Furthermore, membership stability is relevant to appraise whether committees become specialization arenas. Second, chair allocation and selection are important to understanding whether occupying these positions yields policy influence to the MP and their party. Furthermore, it matters whether chair allocation follows a majoritarian rule whereby all payoffs accrue to the governing parties or, differently, it follows a consensual approach heightening the influence of opposition parties. Rules governing committee chairs selection are heterogeneous. In some countries, rules of procedure establish the necessary steps for chair appointment. On the contrary, other countries have only sparse regulations, which results in letting parties decide the allocation of chairs freely. Third, the powers endowed to committee chairs are essential to understand what MPs and parties can do once they control these positions. Recent literature establishes that committee chairs are used as coalition governance mechanisms to keep tabs on partners. This implies, of course, that chairs have agenda-setting powers and special voting rights or sit in partisan coordinating bodies. Surprisingly, in their comparative work on committee chairs, Sieberer and Hoffman find that “committee chairs are institutionally weak in most parliaments”. Indeed, “holding the chair does not provide actors with many additional rights they could use” (2017: 316). Fourth, committee openness influences the extent to which members perceive them as an arena for informational advantage. Committees can operate either behind closed doors or openly, with constant media scrutiny and diffusion of their work, much in line with the character of the plenary sessions. This has behavioural implications for the functioning of committees and, often, entails trade-offs. Committees that operate behind closed doors stimulate inter-party cooperation and information sharing. Within this framework, blurring party lines and engaging in some log-rolling within the committee are optimal strategies whose benefits accrue to all committee members in the long-run. Open committees tend to be more adversarial in that MPs do not want to be perceived as soft on their adversaries. Consequently, they mimic their floor style whereby they engage in advertising and position taking (Mayhew 1974). Fifth, the committee stage in the legislative process determines how influential committees are in the law-making process. Committees have the opportunity to weigh in either before a bill proposal reaches the floor or only

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  75

after it reaches the floor. By and large, committees whose intervention in the legislative process happens before the floor stage have much more power, whereby committee members can shape the menu of choices and become informed about the potential consequences of the bill. Mainly, transmitting that information to the party leadership helps the latter to map the bill onto policy consequences before the floor has a say on the bill’s fate.

Committee powers

Our third block of indicators aims to measure the powers that committees possess to conduct their business efficiently in the legislature. Our three final indicators originate from Strøm’s (1998) previous work as well. They have one thing in common: all three capture from different angles the extent to which committees act independently from the floor. First, revision of bills matters to understand the extent to which committees can change bills without exogenous interference from the floor. The more capacity to act independently, the more influential committees are. Indeed, according to Strøm (1998), committees are well equipped to take over such function because of their informational advantages and small size. Second, control of the committees’ timetable is also linked to committee autonomy vis-à-vis the floor. In contexts in which committees can determine their agenda by freely choosing the witnesses they want to hear, and when they want to do so, they are more powerful. On the contrary, if the parties can meddle in committee business and shape its agenda, then committees are weaker, which ultimately conducts to a wearying of the legislative branch vis-à-vis the executive. Third, the power of requesting documents determines the extent to which committees act at their volition in their search for information. This is crucial to have highly knowledgeable committees. The more institutional prerogatives to request from the bureaucracy, interest groups and so forth, for information and documents, the more influential committees are.

Committee systems in the Iberian legislatures in historical perspective

This section makes an overview of the evolution of committee systems in the first decades of democracy in Portugal and Spain. As discussed in previous chapters, both countries had a similar temporal framework in the institutionalization of their legislature. For this reason, we can more easily appraise how committee systems evolved in both countries. The committee system is the most critical decision-making arena in today’s Portuguese Assembleia da República. However, it has not always been like that. In the early days of democracy, the floor remained the predominant arena in the legislature. According to Leston-Bandeira (2004), in the aftermath of a long dictatorship, political actors needed to conduct their

76  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

work in the Plenum to make it as visible and transparent as possible and heighten, as a result, the legitimacy of legislative procedures. Opello’s work (1986) offers a good insight into the functioning of the committee system in the first decade of democracy in Portugal. More specifically, this author makes the following four points. First, the fledgling committee structure was well developed, ranging from 12 to 20 committees. To be sure, this allowed the committee system to foster specialization and labour division from the early days of democracy. However, despite parties’ awareness of the benefits of allocating MPs to committees depending on their expertise, there was a high turnover rate from one term to the next. Second, political actors realized early that the committee system needed to shadow the jurisdiction of the cabinet´s portfolios. Thus, there was enough latitude to adapt the committee structure depending on the needs. Third, until the mid-1980s, committees only considered bills after the first reading plenary stage (votação na generalidade). In practice, according to Opello, committees were left to “work out the details of compromises made in plenary or to polish up the language” (1986: 302). Fourth, the first decade of the democratic legislature was plagued with what Opello dubs “confusion about the jurisdictional boundaries of some of the committees” (1986: 304). Frequently, bills would be considered by committees only to find out that their competences lied elsewhere and to remit the bill back to the Speaker to reconsider what the proper committee was. Ultimately, at the time of writing, Opello concluded that “Portugal’s Assembleia da República shows no sign of becoming institutionalized and contributes minimally if at all to the policy outputs” (1986: 313). The decade mediating from the mid-1980s through the mid-1990s marked a watershed in committee influence in Portugal. Indeed, committees were a pivotal part of a general movement towards a more rationalized chamber. MPs pushed for several significant reforms of the Rules of Procedure to maximize their influence in the decision-making process and to gain more power vis-à-vis the executive. Leston-Bandeira (2001) summarized the fundamental changes that took place in the committee system in this decade. First, committees were given privileges not only on the pre-floor stage but also in the after-floor stage. This constituted a significant change in their capacity to influence the legislative process. Second, only in the 1980s, were committees given the possibility to meet at the same time as the Chamber. Considering the constraints that time (or lack thereof) imposes on legislatures, this reform fundamentally changed the internal balance of power between committees and the Chamber. Third, the openness of committees also changed during this time, with publicity to media becoming the rule. As Leston-Bandeira (2001) argues, this fits the overall patterns towards a legislative life revolving around committees at the expense of the Plenum. Moving now to the other case study, committees are also nowadays one of the most relevant decision-making bodies in the Spanish Congreso de los Diputados, even though leaders of parliamentary party groups completely dominate their operation (Caballero Míguez 2007). Similar to what has

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  77

happened in other democracies, committees within the Spanish Parliament have become more numerous and acquired increasing political relevance over time as a response to the growing need of division of labour (Oñate 2000). Moreover, committees seem to be a very convenient place to facilitate bargaining among political parties given their lower number of people, the comparatively lower publicity of their meetings and the theoretically higher technical preparation of their members. As Fernandes and colleagues (2018) claim, it is remarkable the almost complete lack of analytical studies on the Spanish Parliament and, above all, its committee system. Although committees play a crucial role within legislatures, and Mattson and Strøm (1995) deem the Spanish ones to be relatively powerful regarding drafting authority and agenda control, research on parliamentary committees of this country has primarily adopted a legal approach. Rubio Llorente (1994) offers a good insight into the operations of the committee system in the first 15 years of democracy in Spain. More specifically, this author contends that, despite the proliferation, diversity and increasing role played by the committees in Spain, parliamentary groups and parties’ central office are still the chief decision-makers. Besides, the fact that committees have become micro-parliaments prevents them from emerging as spaces for proper debate and productive work. In the same volume, Arce Janáriz (1994) criticizes the lack of specialization of the members of the committees, their excessive size and the presence of media in their sessions. Although, overall speaking, the Spanish Congreso has played a significant role only in those legislative terms in which there was a minority government (Martínez 2000), the number and relevance of parliamentary committees in this country have steadily increased over time (Oñate 2000). However, this increasing specialization and broadening of the competences of committees go hand in hand with the continuity of some of the main characteristics present in their first decades of operation such as the lack of real effects of inquiry committees (Arévalo Gutiérrez 1994) and the inconsequentiality of delegating legislative powers from the floor to the committees (Ruiz ­Robledo 1994).

Committee systems in Iberian legislatures in the 21st century

Committee structure

Our foray into committee systems in Iberian countries starts with the committee structure. Table 5.1 displays key elements of the committee structure. In Portugal, there are two types of committees: permanent (comissões permanentes) and ad hoc (comissões eventuais). The former has a permanent nature whereby they survive changes in legislative majorities. This type of committees includes, for example, Finance, Foreign Affairs, Defence and Education. The number of committees is not fixed and has ranged between 14 in 1999 and 12 in 2015.3 Ad hoc committees are also standard in the Portuguese legislature. They do not have a predefined role – that is, rules of

Table 5.1  Committee organization and resources in Iberian legislatures

Portugal Spain

1999 2002 2005 2009 2011 2015 1996 2000 2004 2008 2011 2015 2016

Types and tenure Permanent 14 11 12 13 12 12 21 20 23 28 25 24 28 Ad hoc   6   9   9   7 10   6   3   3   4   2   1   0   3 Size of legislative committees

25–51 25–43 22–51 21–44 21–23 17–23 25–59 40–48 39–48 38–47 44–53 43–53 27–46

Jurisdictional arrangement shadow executive

Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No

Multiple membership Up to 2 or 3, in the case of small parties

Up to 2 or 3, in the case of small parties

Up to 2 or 3, in the case of small parties

Up to 2 or 3, in the case of small parties

Up to 2 or 3, in the case of small parties

Up to 2 or 3, in the case of small parties

Up to 7, in the case of small parties

Up to 4, in the case of small parties

Up to 8, in the case of small parties

Up to 6, in the case of small parties

Up to 8, in the case of small parties

Up to 5, in the case of small parties

Up to 7, in the case of small parties

Subcommittee and working group

Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  79

procedure establish that each new ad hoc committee should take as its first task to define its object and competencies. This is an essential point because political parties need to bargain over the purpose of the committee, which in itself may shape the efficiency and outcome of the committee. Ad hoc committees have gained traction and visibility in legislative life over the past decade (Fernandes 2016). Indeed, parties have found them to be an essential oversight arena and also a good way to gain visibility in topics that matter for the party brand. For example, there have been several ad hoc committees on the banking system, resulting in heightened oversight of the bureaucracy, the executive and regulatory agencies. The size of legislative committees in Portugal varies within legislative terms and over time. From the late 1990s until the mid-2000s, permanent committees’ membership ranged from 21 to 51. Recently, the size of legislative committees decreased, ranging from 17 to 23 nowadays. Another critical dimension to understand committee structure consists in knowing whether jurisdictional arrangements follow the cabinet´s structure. Portuguese committees shadow executive portfolios. To be sure, according to several clerks, there is an effort to maximize the overlap between the committee system and executive portfolios by adapting the former accordingly at the beginning of each term (Fernandes 2013). Typically, this is done via merges or splits in previous committees. Rules of Procedure establish that MPs may be members of multiple committees. However, they can only be effective members of one committee and sit as a substitute in a second committee. Rules give small parties more latitude for they allow them to allocate their MPs to up to three committees. Finally, we turn to subcommittees and working groups. In Portugal, it is possible to create them to heighten efficiency and create a further level of specialization within the committee arena. Moving now to Spain, in this country, there are five types of parliamentary committees: permanent legislative, permanent non-legislative, permanent mixed, non-permanent and inquiry committees. The first three exist in almost every legislative term whereas the other two are created on an ad hoc basis. Permanent legislative committees are in charge of examining and amending if needed the proposed bills before sending them back to the Chamber. The number of permanent legislative committees is not fixed and has ranged between 13 in the term that started in 1996 and 19 in the current term. Hence, there is a clear upwards trend. The list of permanent legislative committees typically includes Constitutional Affairs, Foreign Affairs and Defence, among others. Permanent non-legislative committees are also standard in the Spanish legislature, and their tasks are unrelated to legislative production. Furthermore, permanent mixed committees are bodies that are composed of deputies and senators. They are usually in charge of the relationships between the Parliament and other institutions such as the Spanish Ombudsman or the European Union. Finally, we must refer to the two types of ad hoc committees that exist within the Congreso.

80  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

On the one hand, the assembly may decide to create general non-­ permanent committees to tackle specific issues. The life of these committees expires when their task is over or when the legislative term ends. In contrast to what has happened with the permanent legislative committees, the number of non-permanent committees has not increased in recent years. Finally, inquiry committees are also common, mainly over the last decade. This type of committee usually works as an additional arena of oversight of government performance. For example, in the 12th term (2016-present) there is an inquiry committee about the illegal financial dealings of the Popular Party. The size of parliamentary committees in Spain varies within legislative terms and over time, according to decisions taken by the Parliament’s Presidium at the beginning of each term. Since 1996, permanent legislative committees’ membership has ranged between 37 and 50. Despite the critical changes the party system has undergone over the past few years (see ­Chapter 3), there is no clear trend over time in this dimension. In contrast, another important indicator to understand committee structure, such as the degree of overlap between committees and cabinet portfolios, has changed over time. In the past, committees split or merged at the beginning of each term and every time the organization of the government changed in order to maximize the intersection between the competencies of committees and ministries. This way, the committee system shadowed perfectly the government structure. This pattern started to change slightly in 2008 when the Committee on International Development Cooperation was created. Since then, the number of permanent legislative committees has always been higher than the number of cabinet portfolios and, as a result, in some cases, two committees are in charge of the oversight of one single ministry, even though more often than not the committees’ names still mirror the ministries’ names.4

Concerning the possibility of multiple memberships, the Rules of Procedure of the Congreso allow its members to belong to as many committees as they want. The only limit that exists concerning this point is that the size of the party delegation in permanent legislative committees must be proportional to the total number of MPs of each group. All other MPs who are not part of the party delegation in the committee have the right to attend its meetings and express their opinion, but lack voting rights. On average, each deputy belongs to slightly more than two committees. However, some considerable variation exists not only between groups (membership rates of representatives of small parties are higher) but also within groups (in some parties, a group of MPs become committee specialists and are members of a comparatively higher number of these bodies). Finally, we turn to subcommittees and working groups. In Spain, it is possible to create these to heighten efficiency and add a further level of specialization within the committee arena. In the term that started in 2016, parliamentary groups have considerably resorted to this device, and there are currently seven subcommittees in the Congreso on topics such as electoral reform, party finance, or climate change, among others.

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  81

Committee procedures

In the Portuguese legislature, political parties are the gatekeepers of committee assignments. There are inter- and intra-party dynamics in the assignment of committees. The latter are not observable in that we do not have access to the internal discussion that takes places within each party about who goes where. Our analysis, thus, needs to be restricted to the inter-party part. The Rules of Procedure establishes that parties have the right to assign MPs to committees – that is, committee members become delegates (agents) of the party leadership (the principal) in the committee arena. Furthermore, parties are also bestowed with the capacity to deselect committee members. Indeed, rules of procedure explicitly posit that parties can remove any MP from any committee should they wish to. Committee assignment in Portugal follows a proportionality rule. However, small parties are protected for and, regardless of their size on the floor, they have the right to have at least one seat in every committee. Chair allocation and selection, a coveted payoff, presents a much more complicated picture. In the Portuguese legislature, rules of procedure establish that each committee should have its presidium, with one chair and at least two vice-chairs. Committee chairs and vice-chairs are elected in the first meeting of the committee, which should be chaired by the Speaker. Formal rules establish that the selection and allocation of presidium positions in committees should follow a proportionality rule. However, the inherent small number of available positions creates a de facto majoritarian distribution of chairs. Chair selection and allocation happen as follows.5 The staff prepares a proposal of chairs allocation following a proportional distribution, using the D’Hondt method to rank parties for the institutional positions. Parties take turns in choosing committee chairs. The party with the most MPs gets to have the first iteration and to choose the most coveted chair. However, there is a tacit agreement between the two largest parties, the PS and the PSD, that the chair of the Finance committee should be reserved from the outset for the main opposition party. Typically, parties need to have, at least, 18 MPs on the floor to enter the race for a committee chair. In practice, this means that the two main parties tend to cartelize committee chairs. However, there is also some latitude for small parties to obtain a chair as payoff of a coalition agreement. For example, in the context of the 2002 coalition government, an MP reports that CDS did not have “the size to hold a committee chair. However, PSD offered us one of their committee chairs, as part of the coalition agreement. We were asked to choose between Agriculture and another committee, and we chose the former”.6 Interestingly, in the Portuguese context, committee chairs have not been used as shadowing mechanisms. Instead, as interviews with MPs from CDS – traditionally the junior party in right-wing ­coalitions – have shown, the party cares more about holding chairs in areas that are important for its brand and to keep an electorally attractive profile.

82  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

Rules of procedure are elusive about the powers of the committee presidium. Existing qualitative research offers a foray into how they operate in practice (Fernandes 2013). Most of their benefits are symbolic. First, committee chairs and vice-chairs operate in a non-partisan mode – that is, they do not work for the benefit of their party. Instead, they need to keep a neutral position in their role of checking times, summoning witnesses and conducting committee work. Second, committee chairs benefit from important media exposure in each jurisdiction. Commonly, they are the party’s face in this arena. Such privilege matters for ambitious MPs whose goal may be, for example, to obtain an executive post on that area in the future. Third, committee chairs sit in restricted parliamentary party group meetings where they can voice their opinion and influence the party’s position. Fourth, committee chairs have a monetary benefit, with a marginal increase of 300 euros in their monthly salary. The extent to which committee work has been open to the public has changed dramatically in Portugal over the past decades. Until the mid-1990s, committee work was virtually absent from public scrutiny. The 1993 reform made publicity the rule, opening the committee arena to media access. The 2000s witnessed a new development with the creation of a state-funded television channel solely devoted to parliamentary broadcast (AR-TV). The openness of committee work changed its nature. According to one of our interviewees,

today one can see that media coverage of committee work, which is an accountability advantage, brought less efficiency, because most of the times we are repeating plenary arguments, not for our committee-peers, but to make sure that the media transmit our party’s opinion.7

This evidence suggests that, while publicity may heighten oversight capacities, it is detrimental to efficiency. MPs are more willing to engage in inter-party consensus behind closed doors. Interestingly, this movement fostered the role of subcommittees and working groups. The focus of consensus has changed to the latter because “they offer purely informative, less institutionalized arenas, and have no records or the presence of journalists”.8

Finally, we turn to the committee stage in the legislative process. In Portugal, committees have the power to examine bill proposals before and after the plenary stage. Committees involvement works as follows. Parliamentary parties put forward their bill proposals to the presidium whose role is to select the committee with a best fitting jurisdiction. Subsequently, in the pre-floor stage, committees make a reading of the bill and issue a report. This offers MPs the opportunity to acquire information on the bill before it reaches the floor and to avoid the possibility of parties voting it without understanding potentially unintended consequences. If the floor passes the bill proposal, then it returns to the committee for further debate and vote. The after-floor stage offers the possibility to engage in more fine-tuned discussions and to exchange benefits. Finally, the bill proposal leaves the committee for a final vote on the floor. Committee assignment also follows a proportionality rule in the Spanish legislature. Each party receives a number of posts in the committees

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  83

based on their total number of seats, and all parliamentary groups get at least one seat in each committee. Likewise, parties cannot trade positions in committees with other parties. Hence, the partisan composition of Spanish committees perfectly resembles that of the whole Chamber, and there is not a “separation of purpose” (Cox and McCubbins 2001) between them and the floor. For this reason, committees do not work as effective checks on government performance when the party in office has a parliamentary majority. Once the Presidium of the Chamber has calculated the total entitlement of seats per parliamentary group in each committee, the party can decide at will the distribution of these positions among its members. Rules of procedure also establish that parties have the right to remove committee members freely and to appoint new members without restriction in case of resignation, death or new elections. Hence, in contrast to what happens on the floor, the parliamentary group is the “owner” of the seat, and committee members become a mere delegate of their party leadership, always toeing the party line when they vote, in order to keep their post. Second, it is worth to pay attention to the allocation and selection of committee chairs. According to the Rules of Procedure, the presidium of most committees should have one chair, two vice-chairs and two secretaries. All these “mega-seats”, to use Carroll et al.’s (2006) terminology, are elected according to the rules applicable to the election of the Presidium of the Chamber. Hence, nothing is said about who should occupy each of these ­mega-seats that are, as a result, subject to negotiations between party groups. What is the outcome of this inter-party bargaining process? Several patterns emerge in this regard. First, except for the first term after the democratic transition, the largest party always enjoys a clear overrepresentation in the distribution of chairs. Second, if we exclude the first democratic term again, the aforementioned overrepresentation of the largest party tends to become smaller over time. Third, the number of chairs allocated to non-government parties depends on the type of cabinet (majority or minority) in each term. Opposition parties are more likely to obtain committee chairs when they support a minority government. Fourth, a non-written agreement between the groups establishes that the Chair of the Budget Committee should be from an opposition party. Finally, because of being mostly powerless, the partisan composition of committees’ presidia does not follow any clear pattern and can differ from the composition of the Presidium of the Chamber. To sum up, we cannot extract clear insights from the experience registered thus far about whether committee chairs could work as control devices in case of a future coalition government in Spain. Initial conclusions in this regard suggest that, when deciding what chair non-government parties would like to occupy, they care more about the personal skills and ambition of their leader or the political ideology of the party than about anything else. Rules of procedure are vague about the powers of the committees’ presidia. For example, committee chairs are formally in charge of calling its meetings, but two-party groups or one-fifth of its members can force them to do so. Moreover, the committee presidium sets the meetings’ agenda and

84  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

have the final word on the documentation to circulate among the members of the committee. If members of committees’ presidia want to participate in a debate, they must leave their seat to make their speech. Even though the Rules of Procedure confer to each presidium the same powers as the Chamber Presidium’s (e.g., the chair decides on the amount of time allocated to the discussion of each topic), their main powers are above all symbolic. As in the case of Portugal, the members of the committees’ presidia must behave neutrally and cannot operate in a partisan way. Chairs are usually party ­notables – often, former ministers – and the only ones receiving at least some media coverage together with parties’ spokespersons. Overall, the meetings of the committees within the Spanish Congreso are not public. However, media have access to the sessions unless the committee decides by a majority to keep them secret. The 1982 Rules of Procedure effectively confirmed the regulations about media presence introduced in 1977, and since 2000 a publicly funded television channel, Canal Parlamento, broadcasts all public parliamentary meetings. Although one could think that making committee work open to media contributes to increase transparency, it is also true that the continuous presence of journalists in their sessions complicates the possibility of reaching agreements between parties and, above all, leads to an absurd overlap between the Plenum and the committees. Within this framework, inter-party negotiations no longer take place at the committee level but at a lower level (the ponencia), where parties feel free to exchange legislative payoffs between them. Finally, we turn to the committee stage in the legislative process. In Spain, committees have the power to examine bill proposals after, before, or in-­ between the plenary stage. Moreover, in some circumstances, committees have the final word on the bill and can send it directly to the Senate without any intervention by the plenary. However, in most cases committees’ participation in the legislative process proceeds in any of the following three ways. First, when a party group puts forward a global amendment on a bill proposal submitted by the cabinet (enmienda a la totalidad), or the bill proposal is filed by either a party group or at least 15 deputies (toma en consideración), the floor needs to agree on the idea of taking further action on the bill. If it does so, or when no party group submits a global amendment to a bill proposal originating from the government, bill proposals pass to the Presidium of the Chamber, whose role is to select the committee with a best fitting jurisdiction. Once the Presidium has decided in this regard, the selected committee appoints a working group within it (the ponencia) that will draft a report on the bill. The lack of publicity of the meetings of these ponencias helps party groups to reach consensus more easily. The report of the ponencia will then be discussed and voted by the committee and the floor. The members of the ponencia will have a weighted vote in proportion to the seat share of their party groups. This fact together with the allocation of committee seats based on the total size of the party delegation within the chamber makes very likely that the committee and the floor end up agreeing on the text previously issued by the working group. Finally, the bill proposal leaves the Congreso for a final vote at the Senate.

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  85

Committee powers

Committees in the Portuguese Assembleia da República have an essential role in legislative law-making (see Chapter 10). The said structures have the power to revise bills after their approval in the first reading in the Plenum. Changes introduced at committee stage are still subject to a final vote on the floor (votação final global). In practice, political parties reach consensus in committees about the final version of the bill to be voted upon. Turning to the power to control their timetable, committees in Portugal are entirely independent from the Chamber. We should note, however, that MPs liaise with party leaders to coordinate the balance of work between Chamber and committees. With few exceptions, for example, the fortnightly debate with the prime minister, committee work takes precedent over plenary work. That is, MPs tend to focus on committee work at the expense of plenary work. ­Finally, committees have the power to request documents for their work. Turning now to the powers of the committees in the Spanish Congreso de los Diputados, permanent legislative committees are in charge of assessing the proposed bills and taking the final decision on them in case of full legislative power (competencia legislativa plena). This latter power is automatically delegated from the floor to the committee when the Constitution allows doing so.9 According to Rubio Llorente (1997: 262), one of the most important traits of the Spanish legislative procedure is committees’ high relevance, because they do not only have a massive impact on the Chamber’s decisions, but also often have the last word on proposed bills. More generally, all committees can request the presence of public officials and debate and vote on political statements that push government’s action in one direction. They are also free to set their timetable, even though they are expected to finish their works with regard to each issue within two months. They also have the power to request any document they see as appropriate to conduct their work.

Conclusion

This chapter provides a comparative analysis of committee systems in the Iberian legislatures. Several lessons emerge from this exercise. Importantly, there has been a rationalization of committee work in both countries since the democratization through to the 21st century. Committees are now much more important than they once were compared to the Chamber. For example, both countries witnessed an increase in the number of committees accompanied with a decrease in committee size. Our analysis permits us to draw several conclusions about similarities and dissimilarities between Portugal and Spain. First, the Iberian legislatures differ in their level of effort to make committees shadow portfolios. Portugal has, by and large, a higher matching between committees and portfolios, which empowers the legislative branch. In contrast, in Spain, since 2008, there has been a decrease in the matching between committees and portfolios. Such difference is puzzling in that both

86  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

countries have had a long tradition with minority governments, which tend to be correspond to strong matching committees (Strøm 1990). Second, Portugal and Spain differ in MPs’ incentives to specialize. Whilst in Portugal there are restrictions to multiple membership, in Spain such restrictions do not exist. In the Congreso de los Diputados, MPs tend to sit in two committees on average while in the Assembleia da República MPs sit in only one committee. Moreover, Spanish MPs are unlikely to sit in the same committee in two consecutive terms. Third, over the past few years, committee systems in Portugal and Spain witnessed a similar experience in their relationship with media. There has been a movement towards less business conducted behind closed doors to heighten accountability and curb citizens’ lack of trust in institutions. Both committee systems adapted similarly. Our evidence suggests that subcommittees, which are less visible to the public eye, are now widely used to conduct business that used to be carried out in committees. This enables parties to obtain gains from negotiations and to work in a more consensual fashion. Fourth, both committee systems operate similarly in their allocation procedure. To be sure, political parties are the main gatekeepers, in line with most of their European parliamentary counterparts. Parties have the power to select and deselect members. The latter, in turn, are motivated to deliver benefits to the party as committees are useless for fiscal particularism in Portugal and Spain, and the electoral system provides MPs little incentives to cultivate a personal vote. Our comparative examination of Portuguese and Spanish legislatures suggests that both countries have rationalized and developed their committee systems. Our empirical indicators suggest a fairly balanced picture of both systems. Portuguese committees are more powerful in some areas while Spanish fare better in others. Overall, both committee systems are powerful and can influence policy-making in the legislature.

Acknowledgement

This research was supported by the Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation (FCT), as part of the “Into the ‘secret garden’ of Portuguese politics: parliamentary candidate selection in Portugal, 1976–2015” project (PTDC/CPO-CPO/30296/2017).

Notes

Committee systems in Portugal and Spain  87

committee system within the Spanish Parliament did not change after the passage of a vote of no confidence in 2018 to fit the structure of the newly formed government. 5 Fernandes (2013) conducted several interviews with clerks and MPs in the context of his doctoral dissertation which are used in the next paragraphs, in order to understand the politics of committee chairs selection and allocation. 6 Interview with João Rebelo (CDS), Lisbon, 23 January 2013. 7 Interview with Duarte Pacheco (PSD), Lisbon, 21 January 2013. 8 Interview with Duarte Pacheco (PSD), Lisbon, 21 January 2013. 9 The Constitution (art. 75.3) does not allow this sort of delegation when the bill concerns constitutional reform or international issues, among others.

References

Arce Janáriz, A. (1994). Creación, composición y órganos directivos de las comisiones parlamentarias. In Las comisiones parlamentarias, J. C. da Silva Ochoa (ed.). Vitoria: Parlamento Vasco, 225–360. Arévalo Gutiérrez, A. (1994). Comisiones de investigación y de encuesta. In Las comisiones parlamentarias, J. C. da Silva Ochoa (ed.). Vitoria: Parlamento Vasco, 361–433. Caballero Míguez, G. (2007). Comisiones, grupos parlamentarios y diputados en la gobernanza del Congreso de los Diputados. Revista de Estudios Políticos, 135(Jan–Mar): 67–107. Carroll, R., and Cox, G. W. (2012). Shadowing ministers: Monitoring partners in coalition governments. Comparative Political Studies, 45(2), 220–236. Carroll, R., Cox, G. W., and Pachón, M. (2006). How parties create electoral democracy, chapter 2. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 31(2), 153–174.Cox, G. W., and McCubbins, M. D. (1993). Legislative leviathan: Party government in the House. Berkeley: University of California Press. Cox, G. W., and McCubbins, M. D. (2001). The institutional determinants of economic policy outcomes. In Presidents, parliaments, and policy, S. Haggard and M. D. McCubbins (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 21–63. Fernandes, J.M. (2013). Power Sharing in Legislatures: Mega-Seats in Twelve European Parliamentary Democracies. PhD Dissertation. Florence: European University Institute. Fernandes, J. M. (2016). Intra-party delegation in the Portuguese legislature: Assigning committee chairs and party coordination positions. The Journal of Legislative Studies, 22(1), 108–128. Fernandes, J. M., Riera, P., and Cantú, F. (2018). The politics of committee chairs assignment in Ireland and Spain. Parliamentary Affairs, 72(1), 182–201. Gschwend, T., and Zittel, T. (2018). Who brings home the pork? Parties and the role of localness in committee assignments in mixed-member proportional systems. Party Politics, 24(5), 488–500. Hansen, M. E. (2010). Committee assignment politics in the Danish Folketing. Scandinavian Political Studies, 33(4), 381–401. Hansen, M. E. (2011). A random process? Committee assignments in Dáil Éireann. Irish Political Studies, 26(3), 345–360. Kam, C. J. (2009). Party discipline and parliamentary politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Krehbiel, K. (1991). Information and legislative organization. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. LaPalombara, J. (1974). Politics within nations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

88  Jorge M. Fernandes and Pedro Riera

Leston-Bandeira, C. (2001). The Portuguese parliament during the first two decades of democracy. West European Politics, 24(1), 137–156. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2004). From legislation to legitimation: The role of the Portuguese parliament. London: Routledge. Martin, S., and Mickler, T. A. (2018). Committee assignments: Theories, causes and consequences. Parliamentary Affairs, 72(1), 77–98. Martínez, A. (2000). El Congreso de los Diputados en España: funciones y rendimiento. Madrid: Editorial Tecnos. Mattson, I., and Strøm, K. (1995). Parliamentary committees. In Parliaments and majority rule in Western Europ, H. Doring (ed.). Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 249–307. Mayhew, D. R. (1974). Congress: The electoral connection. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Mickler, T. A. (2018). Who gets what and why? Committee assignments in the German Bundestag. West European Politics, 41(2), 517–539. Müller, W. C. (2000). Political parties in parliamentary democracies: Making delegation and accountability work. European Journal of Political Research, 37(3), 309–333. Oñate, P. (2000). La organización del Congreso de los Diputados. In El Congreso de los Diputados en España: funciones y rendimiento, A. Martinez (ed.). Madrid: Editorial Tecnos, 69–94. Opello Jr., W. C. (1986). Portugal’s parliament: An organizational analysis of legislative performance. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 11(3), 291–319. Rasch, B. E. (2009). Opposition parties, electoral incentives and the control of government ministers: Parliamentary questioning in Norway. In Parlamente, agendasetzung und vetospieler Festschrift für Herbert Döring, S. Ganghof, C. Honnige and C. Stecker (eds.). Wiesbaden: Springer, 199–214. Riera, P. (2011). Closed party list. In Personal representation: The neglected dimension of electoral systems, J. Colomer (ed.). Colchester: ECPR Press, 55–80. Riera, Pedro and Francisco Cantú. 2018. “Determinants of legislative committee membership in proportional representation systems”. Party Politics 24(5): 524–535. Rubio Llorente, F. (1994). Las comisiones parlamentarias. In Las comisiones parlamentarias, J. C. da Silva Ochoa (ed.). Vitoria: Parlamento Vasco, 205–223. Rubio Llorente, F. (1997). La forma del poder. Estudios sobre la Constitución. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Constitucionales. Ruiz Robledo, A. (1994). La delegación legislativa en las comisiones. In Las comisiones parlamentarias, J. C. da Silva Ochoa (ed.). Vitoria: Parlamento Vasco, 457–492. Sartori, G. (1987). The theory of democracy visited. 1. The contemporary debate. London: Chatham House. Shepsle, K. A. (1978). The giant jigsaw puzzle: Democratic committee assignments in the modern House. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Sieberer, U., and Höhmann, D. (2017). Shadow chairs as monitoring device? A comparative analysis of committee chair powers in Western European parliaments. The Journal of Legislative Studies, 23(3), 301–325. Strøm, K. (1990). Minority government and majority rule. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Strøm, K. (1998). Parliamentary committees in European democracies. The Journal of Legislative Studies, 4(1), 21–59. Verba, S. (1961). Small groups and political behavior: A study of leadership. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Yordanova, N. (2011). The European Parliament: In need of a theory. European Union Politics, 12(4), 597–617.

Section III Representation and actors

Introduction1

Political representation has four basic dimensions (Pitkin 1967): descriptive, substantive, formalistic and symbolic. This chapter focuses on the first two, in the context of Portugal and Spain, with a special emphasis on the period before and after the Great Recession. It analyses the levels of resemblance between these countries’ national legislatures and their respective societies in terms of socio-demographic characteristics (gender, age, education and profession), and it identifies levels of voters-elites’ congruence on the leftright ideological scale and how these have changed. But why does this matter? First, because the levels of congruence between MPs and voters, especially in relation to substantive representation, are a key element for the quality of the democratic functioning of any polity: the greater the levels of congruence between voters and policy-makers, the more likely public policies reflect the will of the people (Manin, Stokes, and Przeworski 1999; Wessels 2007). Second, because some level of (sociodemographic) resemblance between voters and their representatives is desirable, at least in certain circumstances and up to a certain point (see Phillips 1995; Mansbridge 1999). A closer resemblance leads to higher social diversity and a better incorporation of usually marginal groups, disparate sensibilities and points of view and different talents. Third, because the Great Recession has had a major impact upon the functioning of the Southern European democracies, namely in Portugal and Spain, and considerably impacted democracy in each polity (Freire and Lisi 2016; Morlino and Sotilotta 2019). The chapter proceeds by first outlining the theoretical framework, where the concepts of descriptive and substantive representation are discussed, to then outline the methodology and data used before analysing the results.

Descriptive and substantive representation

“Descriptive representation” refers to the sociodemographic characteristics of the political elite representing citizens in parliaments (MPs). The issue at

6 Social distance and ideological congruence between MPs and citizens

Iberian Legislatures before and after the Great Recession

André Freire and Xavier Coller

92  André Freire and Xavier Coller

stake here is the extent to which MPs are similar to the citizens who elect them, whether parliaments reflect the social structure of societies with its social cleavages, or, to put it differently, whether parliaments and societies are socially distant. Descriptive representation can be studied from two opposite models of elite configuration: independence and agglutination (Putnam 1976: 21–22). On the one hand, the independence model assumes that every person in a society has the same chances of becoming an MP irrespective of their position in the social structure. In other words, the chance of serving in parliaments should be similar independently of gender, wealth, education or job. Consequently, in this model parliaments would mirror the social cleavages structuring a particular society. On the other hand, the agglutination model assumes that some characteristics are more or less infrequent in society, but that people with political responsibilities tend to agglutinate (e.g. around education, wealth). Thus, a socioeconomically privileged group is usually found in positions of political power, like MPs (Putnam 1976: 22). These two models raise two specific considerations. First, these are theoretical extremes of an elite formation model; consequently, as Weberian ideal types, they do not exist in society in pure form. For instance, no society can be constructed upon the independence model since there are always social biases in conforming a political elite—not all citizens have equal chances of becoming part of the political elite.2 Second, however, these two models are heuristically helpful to approach the characteristics of political elites—irrespective of the country and the historical period analysed, all political elites tend to follow the agglutination rather than the independence model. There are always specific features found to be more frequent among MPs than in society—university education, for instance, or specific professions (e.g. lawyers, professors, liberal professionals). ­Although societies are socially diverse (gender, education, professions, etc.), the consequence of the agglutination model is a more or less internally homogeneous political elite distant from society, or what Wright Mills (1956: 294–295) called ‘an integrated elite’. Coller and ­Santana (2009), for instance, found a high level of homophily among Spanish MPs, especially in regional parties. However, from a historical point of view, the internal composition of representative political elites (MPs) has changed dramatically, reflecting deep social changes. The most historically comprehensive study of political elites in ­Europe, that of Best and Cotta (2000),3 shows that over the years, landed aristocracy and army officials, ‘the notables’, are progressively replaced by middle class (or upper middle class) liberal professionals, university trained politicians that, following Gaxie (2018: 491), tend to become professional politicians. Additionally, women are incorporated into parliaments, although at different intensities according to countries and periods of time (­Santana, ­Aguilar, and Coller 2016). Social changes combined with institutional incentives for

Social distance and ideological congruence  93

consociationism and positive discrimination, as indicated by Norris and Lovenduski (1995: 93–95), mediated by the cognitive framework and actions of selectorates (Coller and Cordero 2018), help to explain growing (although limited) social diversity inside political elites and the institutions they occupy. In this sense, the “rule of distance” between societies and political elites (MPs) formulated by Sartori et al. (1963: 317), is expected to be diminishing, meaning that the distance travelled (and consequently, the effort deployed) by a citizen from disadvantaged origins to become an MP shortens. Powell (2004) divided the research on political representation into two main groups (see also Wessels 200). The first group includes works analysing the relationship between the distribution of the electorate’s preferences for parties in (national) elections, and the distribution of parliamentary seats amongst these parties according to the electoral and party system. The second group follows the path laid out by Miller and Stokes (1963). These authors established a tradition of empirical research in which the underlying assumption is that the congruence between political preferences of elected representatives and those they represent is a key part of the quality of political representation, particularly when the preferences of the elected representatives correspond with the behaviour of MPs in parliament. That is to say, the greater the degree of congruence between the preferences of the electorate and MPs, the greater the probability the electorate will feel to be well represented and the greater the probability MPs (and the government) will act in accordance with the people’s preferences, which is a basic axiom of any representative democracy (Manin, Stokes, and Przeworski 1999). These types of studies are rarely found in Spain: the existing studies comparing MPs’ and voters’ attitudes and values do not usually tap into this issue in terms of ideological or policy preferences (see Méndez-Lago and Martínez 2002; Coller et al. 2018; Sánchez-Ferrer 2018). In the Portuguese case, these studies are more common but need to be updated in the post crisis period (Belchior and Freire 2013; Freire and Belchior 2013; Freire, Tsatsanis, and Lima 2016). Moreover, these Portuguese studies are mainly based on issue/policy representation and not on ideological representation. The congruence model can also be associated with a populist vision of democracy, considering its bottom-up perspective in relation to political representation, which places a great deal of emphasis on the electorate’s preferences and on the need for congruence between the actions of MPs and voters. However, some empirical studies have shown there is also a structuring of policy preferences made from the top (i.e. by the elected representatives and the parties but also high officials, as Genieys 2017 shows) which is a type of ‘representation from above’ (Esaiasson and Holmberg 1996), thus pointing to a more top-down vision of democracy. We consider these two ‘models of democracy’ to be ideal-types, thus we believe they are not wholly incompatible in practice. Considering what we

94  André Freire and Xavier Coller

know from previous studies, there are possibly four scenarios in terms of concurrent voter moves (Esaiasson and Holmberg 1996). First, if the position of MPs moves towards that of voters, and the positions of the latter are either stable or strengthened in the same direction, we can talk about bottom-up representation. Second, if the position of voters moves towards that of MPs, and the positions of the latter are either stable or strengthened in the same direction, we can talk about top-down representation. Third, ‘confluential dynamic representation’ is when both voters and deputies move towards each other’s opinions from different starting points. Finally, ‘disconnecting dynamic representation’, is when voters and deputies move in opposite directions from a similar starting point. Since we are using very limited data, especially in the Spanish case in terms of time span, and since we lack in many previous studies to be able to construct hypotheses (specially for the Spanish case), we consider this an exploratory, tentative and provisional effort to map changes in ideological representation before and after the Great Recession, in Portugal and Spain.

Methods and data

Measuring social distance

Based on previous work (Coller 2008; Coller, Navarro, and Portillo 2016; Coller et al. 2018) we measure how distant parliaments (and MPs) are from their societies and compare this distance on two dimensions—historical and territorial. To allow for a systematic comparison, we use the Index of Social Disproportion (ISD), or Index of Electoral Bias as Norris and Lovenduski (1995: 96) call it.4 The ISD relates to a particular group (women, university trained and so forth) in two populations, namely, MPs and citizens. Its formula is quite intuitive:

ISD = Proportion of a group in Parliament Proportion of the same group in the population

ISD adopts values around 1. We shall take the example of women, although other groups (religious, professional, ethnic, etc.) could be used as well. If the proportion of women in parliament is the same as the proportion of women in society, ISD will be 1 or close to this value. If ISD reaches a value over 1, then that means that there is an overrepresentation of women in Parliament. Conversely, if ISD gets a value below 1, it means there is an underrepresentation of women in Parliament. The level of under or over representation is given by the magnitude of the ISD. In order to allow for a more systematic comparison across time and territories, we use the Synthetic Index of Social Disproportion (SISD), which calculates the level of identity between a population of MPs (pi) and citizens (Pi) on different characteristics (I) weighted by the proportions of

Social distance and ideological congruence  95

those characteristics (gender, age, profession, educational level) in the population (Pi).

∑

∑

−

−

=

=

ISPS=1 1

1

p P P

P

i i

i

I

i

i

i

I

SISD can reach values between 0 and 1, with 0 indicating the unlikely case of total dissimilarity between MPs and society and 1 the also unlikely situation of parliament mirroring exactly society’s social structure. Taken together, by comparing periods and countries, we can ascertain how distant parliament is from the society electing its MPs, and how it has changed over time.

Measuring ideological congruence

The Great Recession may have led to changes in the social structure of parliaments, but what changes can we discern in ideological congruence between MPs and voters in Portugal and Spain? Several methodological issues need to be addressed before proceeding with the analysis (­Andeweg 2011; Belchior and Freire 2013). First: what data and measures to use? We use both mass surveys (to measure voters’ ideological orientations) and MP surveys (to measure elite positions; instead of party manifestos, expert surveys or voters’ perceptions) because they are the most appropriate to tackle the dispersion of preferences at each level. Additionally, the choice of left-right self-placement, instead of issue/policy preferences, to measure the levels of congruence between voters and MPs, is dependent on data availability, namely in terms of variables allowing comparison across levels (voters versus representatives), countries and time. Although in some countries left-right self-placement is weakly related with substantive issues (like in Portugal), in general it can be said to encapsulate the major conflicts in a polity, thus functioning as a type of super issue (Freire 2015). A second decision relates to the unit of analysis, the party (in the electorate and in parliament) or the voters in each district and their representative. Since we are dealing with closed list proportional representation systems, where the party is the fundamental agent in the political representation process, we decided to compare party voters (as measured by party vote) and MPs, segmented by parties. A final and third decision relates to the statistical measures of congruence to use. We know that relative measures (i.e. those that take into account the dispersion of preferences among the electorate) are better than absolute measures (means, percentages, etc.) (Andeweg 2011; Belchior and Freire 2013). Here we adopt relative measures that take into account the full distributions at both levels, which are proposed by Golder and Stramski (2010).

96  André Freire and Xavier Coller

Data

For descriptive representation, we use biographic data on MPs and census data on citizens, to compare the levels of resemblance between the social demographic profiles of MPs and the population, before and after the crisis. For comparative purposes we have selected MPs information that coincides with that of the census. The variables compared are age, gender, education and profession. For substantive representation, we rely mainly on elite and mass surveys. For Portugal, similar elite and mass surveys were conducted in 2008 and 2016, that is, before and after the crisis, as part of major international research projects, namely CCS (Comparative Candidates Survey—references included with tables and ). To study ideological congruence between MPs and voters, we use the left-right self-placement of each group, segmented by party; this methodology is also used for Spain. For Spain, we utilise the elite and citizen surveys conducted by the INTUNE project (Cotta, Isernia, and Bellucci 2007a and 2007b), and Coller (2009–2012) (see CIS 2009, 2012). These are complemented by mass surveys with comparable variables (in terms of left-right self-placement) in the relevant time points. More recent elite data is currently unavailable because the CCS—Spain, for the last elections, is still being fielded. Thus, the analysis of post crisis congruence must be undertaken with greater caution because of the timing of the Spanish surveys, which neither include the more recent changes in public and elite opinions, nor the new parties (above all Podemos and Ciudadanos) that entered the parliamentary arena after the crisis.

Social disproportion in Portugal and Spain

It is remarkable how MPs, taken together, have similar sociographic characteristics and how similar their evolution is, although they have different departing points. Table 6.1 illustrates this. Table 6.1 compares MPs and electors in Portugal and Spain at two different moments: around 2001 and around 2011. These two observation points were selected for two reasons. First these are the years in which census data are collected and consequently provide a more accurate picture of how society looks. For the MPs, we have selected the legislatures close to these years, giving priority to the more recent ones. Second, comparing these two moments allows us to analyse the effects of the crisis in the configuration of the political elite and its distance with society. Given the data available, we are limited to four sociodemographic characteristics (gender, age, education and profession) to compare MPs and citizens. In both countries, although the population is divided almost in two halves in terms of gender, the proportion of women among MPs is lower, although in Portugal (20 per cent in 2002, 33 per cent in 2015) they seem to have more problems in accessing parliament than in Spain (29 per cent and 39 per cent, respectively). The proportion of female MPs has increased with differing intensity in each country.

Table 6.1  MPs and population socio-demographic profiles (%)

Portugal Spain Portugal Spain

MPs 2002 Population 2001 MPs 2000 Population 2001 MPs 2015 Population 2011 MPs 2016 Population 2011

Gender Male 80 47.6 71 49 66.5 47 61 49 Female 20 52.4 29 51 33.5 53 39 51 Total (N/n) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 (230) (8,303,248) (350) (40,847,371) (230) (8,657,240) (350) (46,574,725)

Age Under 36 16.1 33.9 11.7 35.2 10.9 27.9 13 29.3 36–50 38.7 26.1 47.9 26.1 40.9 27.1 43 29.6 Over 50 45.2 40.0 40.4 38.7 48.3 45 44 40.9 Total (N/n) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 (230) (8,699,615) (350) (33,505,967) (230) (8,989,849) (349) (38,220,360) Mean 47 45.1 47 46.6 49 47.9 49 48.1

Education Up to primary 0.9 78.3 0.6 38.4 0.9 69.4 1.4 25.8 Secondary 14.3 13.9 8 48 5.7 18.6 5.1 55 University (including postgraduate)

83.5 7.7 89.1 13.5 92.6 15.4 93 19.6

DA (Not stated) 1.3 — 2.3 — 0.9 0.3 — Total (N/n) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 (230) (8,303,248) (350) (34,223,905) (230) (8,989,849) (350) (39,083,735)

Occupation Managers, entrepreneurs, owners

9.6 7 9.4 8 5.7 7.8 4.6 3

Law-related professions 25.7 0.5 23.4 1 26.5 0,8 21.9 1

Teachers 20.1 4.8 25.7 5 20 5,8 22.9 5 Workers 0.4 68.4 9.1 68 0.9 66,6 8,9 71 Others 44,5 19 30.8 19 46.7 19 34 20 Not stated 1.4 0.9 8 Total (N/n) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 (230) (4,650,947) (350) (16,329,713) (230) (4.361.187) (350) (23.875.225)

Sources: For population: Instituto Nacional de Estatística (2002 and 2011 census) and Eurostat for Portugal (www.ine.pt); Instituto Nacional de Estadística (2002 and 2011 census) for Spain (www.ine.es). For MPs in Spain: Bapolcon (c) based on the CSO2016-78016-R research project and Coller et al. (2018). For MPs in Portugal: Freire (2009) and Freire, Lisi, and Tsatsanis (2017).

1 Percentages may not add exactly to 100 due to rounding. 2. Population percentages are based on the closest age to voting (18). For education in Spain, population over 16 years old. For education in Portugal, population over 15 years old. 3. For professions in Portugal, the category “others” include “students and retired” for MPs. Professions in the population includes all employed citizens. For professions in Spain, population includes those active in the workforce. 4. Data differences with previous research on Spain are due to the different variables used and to the calculations of the total. In this case, we have considered “missing” values for the total.

98  André Freire and Xavier Coller

In both countries, the average age of politicians is similar to that of the population, although in Portugal MPs are slightly older than the average citizen. The most common age group is that of MPs over 50 years old, although the presence of young politicians in Spain is noteworthy, with a higher proportion of MPs in the 36–50-year-old group. In both countries, contrary to the population, MPs are characterised by having the highest educational credentials with minor differences at the beginning of the century (83 per cent in Portugal vs 89 per cent in Spain). Ten years later, the proportion of university-trained politicians had increased to the 90 per cent level, as a reflection as well of a significant change in society, where the presence of citizens with university credential had also increased. It is not strange, then, that the most common professions are those associated with the institutionalised cultural capital provided by universities: lawyers, teachers, but also other liberal professions not shown here but grouped under “others” like architects, doctors, etc. By far, the most common profession among MPs is that related to the law (lawyers, judges, prosecutors) in both periods and in both countries, but particularly in Portugal. That of teachers is more common in Spain, but has diminished in recent years. Employees are more prone to enter parliament in Spain than in Portugal, whereas managers represent about a tenth of the MPs, although their presence in Portugal has diminished recently. These changes over the years hide something important: taken together, MPs have become more socially diverse showing that parliaments are more open to society. Whether this is an effect of the crisis or a trend that was intensified by the crisis needs to be explored further. In terms of causing more or less open parliaments, the crisis may have affected Spain more than Portugal since it was only there that new parties whose success is directly related to the effects of the crisis (Podemos and Ciudadanos) have emerged. According to recent studies, these two parties have added more diversity to parliaments (Kakepaki et al. 2018). However, contrary to Spain, it seems that traditional parties in Portugal have opened the electoral lists to citizens involved in protests against the effects of the crisis (Lisi 2018), generating as well renewal and social diversity. We turn now to the analysis of how distant MPs are from society and whether the expected gap closes or widens. As explained above, we employ the Index of Social Disproportion (ISD) to ascertain whether the distortion between parliament and society is large and how it has changed. Table 6.2 shows that men are overly overrepresented in both countries, although less so in Spain than in Portugal. Consequently, women are underrepresented making up half of society. This is so in both periods considered. However, ISD lowers for men and rises for women between 2001 and 2015, which means that, although women are still underrepresented, their presence in the political elite has grown. In comparative terms, Portuguese parties have made a greater effort to incorporate more women into the national parliament, although the Portuguese Parliament is still behind that of the Spanish Congress of Deputies. Therefore, in terms of gender, the gap between MPs and society has narrowed over the years to the point

Social distance and ideological congruence  99

that current MPs in both countries are more socially representative than in 2001. On average, MPs of both countries reflect well the average age of electors in their respective countries. However, when we analyse age cohorts, the picture is slightly different. Table 6.2 shows that while the over 50-year-old MPs are present in parliament in similar proportions as in society, the other two groups behave differently. The younger group (under 36 years old) is clearly underrepresented in both countries and in both periods. However, in Spain the gap marginally closes (the ISD goes towards the 1 pole) while in Portugal it widens (the ISD distances itself from the 1 pole). That is an effect of a lower proportion of MPs in this group age combined with a lower proportion of people in the same group age (perhaps due to migration and a lower birth rate). The intermediate age group (between 36 and 50) is overrepresented in both countries and in both periods. Although in Spain this overrepresentation diminishes over the years and in Portugal it grows slightly, the fact is that this age group is more present in the political elite

Table 6.2  Index of Social Disproportion (ISD) for Spain and Portugal

2000–2002 2011–2016 Differences

ISDpt ISDsp ISDpt ISDsp ISDpt ISDsp

Gender Male 1.68 1.45 1.41 1.24 −0.27 −0.21 Female 0.38 0.57 0.63 0.76 0.25 0.19

Age Under 36 0.47 0.33 0.39 0.44 −0.08 0.11 36–50 1.48 1.84 1.51 1.45 0.03 −0.39 Over 50 1.13 1.04 1.07 1.08 −0.06 0.04 Mean 1.04 1.01 1.02 1.02 −0.02 0.01

Education Primary or under 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.05 0 0.03 Secondary 1.03 0.17 0.31 0.09 −0.72 −0.08 University 10.84 6.60 6.01 4.74 −4.83 −1.86

Occupation Managers, entrepreneurs 1.37 1.18 0.73 3.53 −0.64 2.35 Law related professions 51.40 23.40 33.13 23.40 −18.27 0 Teachers 4.19 5.14 3.45 3.14 −0.74 −2 Workers 0.01 0.13 0.01 0.04 0 −0.09 Others 2.34 1.62 2.46 1.98 0.12 0.36

Source: See previous Table.

1 Portugal, population data: 2001 and 2011 census; MPs data: 2002 and 2015 legislatures. Spain, population data: 2001 and 2011 census; MPs data: 2000 and 2016 legislatures. 2. ISD magnitude close to 1 means MPs and society are similar in their internal composition. The further ISD magnitude departs from 1, the more over or under representation of a particular group in the political elite.

100  André Freire and Xavier Coller

than in society. The behaviour is therefore slightly different between the two countries. While in Spain the age gap closes in every age group (except for the 50+ group, where the ISD does not change over the years), in Portugal, the disproportion grows slightly except in the 50+ cohort; a group that reduces the gap with the population. However, taken together with the average age, there is a good fit between MPs and society. One of the most persistent features of any political elite is that its members usually have a disproportionately high level of educational qualifications and, consequently, depart from society on this variable. Table 6.2 shows this is also the case for Portugal and Spain. Except for the 2002 legislature in Portugal, people with only secondary or primary education are underrepresented, contrary to those who have attended university. Overrepresentation of university educated MPs is the highest, although in comparative terms it has declined over the years in both countries. In this respect, parliaments tend to mirror society more in 2015 than in 2001—the educational gap may be closing. We have selected four professional posts for their relevance in political elites and in society. By far, the largest group of people in industrial or even postindustrial societies is that of employees; those employed by others and who cannot be considered professionals or technicians. Among MPs, the most frequent profession is that of lawyers and teachers, although civil servants have also become common lately. Managers, entrepreneurs, owners and associated jobs are also present in modern political elites. Table 6.2 shows the ISD for these four professional groups. Lawyers are clearly overrepresented in the political elite of both countries in both periods, although their weight has declined in Portugal, and is now similar to Spain. With a different magnitude, a similar situation is found among teaching professionals: their presence is greater among MPs (especially on the left, as demonstrated by Coller et al. 2018) vis-à-vis their presence in society, although their weight has also declined slightly. Managers have a more balanced presence, although they were overrepresented among the political elite at the beginning of the century. In Portugal, their relative weight among parliamentarians diminishes whilst it increases in Spain; indicating that the representation of managers, owners and associated jobs is on the rise in Spanish politics. Finally, workers are the professional group most underrepresented. Their presence in society is very large, but they get the lowest ISD of all, and this has not improved over the years. Using data from Table 6.1, we can corroborate the results obtained with the Index of Social Disproportion as shown in Table 6.3. Portugal reaches a value of 0.75 around 2001, while in 2015 (using the 2001 census data for the population) the ISDS rises to 0.76. This means that, although the change may seem small (ISDS varies between 0 and 1), it goes in the direction of resembling society more, rather than the opposite. This means the Portuguese Parliament is gaining some social diversity. A similar situation is found in Spain, albeit more intensely. Comparing both countries in both periods, Spain’s Congreso de los Diputados seems closer to society than Portugal’s Assembleia da República. ISDS in Spain is 0.82 and 0.83.5

Social distance and ideological congruence  101

And yet, it goes in the same direction: that of becoming closer to society over the years. In this case, the incorporation of new parties (Podemos and Ciudadanos) into national institutional politics has added more social diversity (Kakepaki et al. 2018).

Substantive representation

Ideological congruence in Portugal and Spain

Next, we analyse the findings in terms of trends in ideological congruence, before and after the Great Recession. Table 6.4 provides a synthetic

Table 6.3  Synthetic Index of Social Disproportion in Spain and Portugal

Circa 2001 Circa 2015–2016

Portugal MPs Spain MPs Population Portugal Population Spain Portugal MPs Spain MPs Population Portugal Population Spain

% Women 0.2 0.29 0.524 0.51 0.335 0.39 0.53 0.51 % Main professions 0.558 0.676 0.807 0.82 0.531 0.583 0.81 0.719

% Over 50 0.452 0.4 0.404 0.387 0.483 0.45 0.44 0.409 % University 0.835 0.891 0.077 0.135 0.926 0.93 0.154 0.196 SISD 0.75 0.82 0.76 0.83

Source: See Table 1. Calculations not shown due to space limitations. For the age variable we used the category (over 50 years old) with the highest frequency among MPs. For education, we used the most common among MPs (university degree). For gender, we used women as the baseline category. For the main professions we used managers and associated jobs, law professionals, professors and workers. Results may change if we add new categories such as place of birth or if we employ variables in a different fashion. For instance, following Coller et al. (2018), rather than using the most common age group among MPs to calculate SISD, we could have used the average age plus/minus a standard deviation.

Table 6.4  Party-voters Congruence (many-to-many) before and after the 2008 economic crisis, Portugal

Party-voters’ ideological congruence before crisis

Party-voters’ ideological congruence after crisis

Congruence 2008 MPs (N) Voters (n) Congruence 2016 MPs (N) Voters (n)

BE 29.2 8 24 32.3 19 297 CDU 25.8 9 66 56.4 12 121 PS 73.3 95 299 67.1 53 390 PSD 50.9 21 214 65.8 63 473 CDS-PP 62.5 8 10 55.3 12 104

Sources: Congruence 2008: CCS Portugal 2008 (MPs) CCS Portugal 2008 (voters); CCS Portugal 2016 (MPs) and CCS Portugal 2016 (voters) in Freire and Viegas (2008a, 2008b), and Freire, Lisi, and Tsatsanis (2016a, 2016b).

102  André Freire and Xavier Coller

perspective of the levels of ideological congruence (MPs-citizens) for each party between 2008 and 2016 in Portugal. The figures for ‘congruence’ refer to the common areas (pictured in grey in Figure 6.1) in the distribution of the left-right ideological preferences of MPs and citizens. Table 6.4 shows there was an increase in the levels of ideological congruence for the BE, the CDU and the PSD between 2008 and 2016. Both

AU: We have been changed the part figures of “figures 1.1 to 1.10” to “Figure 6.1”. Kindly check and confirm or revise as applicable.

Figure 6.1  Ideological congruence between voters and MPs in Portugal, before and after the crisis.

Social distance and ideological congruence  103

the socialists (PS) and the conservatives (CDS-PP) show a decrease in ideological congruence MPs-citizens. However, the two main parties, PS and PSD, remain the more congruent in 2016, as was already the case in 2008 (then joined also by CDS-PP). Most previous research has focused on policy representation rather than less left-right ideological representation (Belchior 2010; Belchior and Freire 2013; Freire and Belchior 2013; Freire, Tsatsanis, and Lima 2016; Freire, Tsatsanis, and Correia 2018), so it is difficult to make comparisons. In terms of left-right ideological representation, previous studies have shown (at least with ‘absolute measures’ of congruence) that the PS and the PSD, often joined by the CDS-PP, are the more congruent parties, and the radical left parties (BE and CDU) the least congruent (See Belchior 2010; Belchior and Freire 2013; Freire and Belchior 2013). However, the picture is different when policy representation is at stake: the left-wing parties are more congruent with voters on socioeconomic issues than the right-wing parties; the opposite is true for libertarian-­authoritarian issues; and both of these patterns were reinforced with the Great Recession (Tsatsanis and Lima 2016; Freire, Tsatsanis, and Correia 2018). These differences might of course be due to the fact that

Figure 6.1  (Continued).

104  André Freire and Xavier Coller

the left-right ideological scale contains both identity and policy components (Freire 2015; Sánchez-Ferrer 2018), whereas in the case of policy representation we are dealing only with the latter. We not turn to the changes in ideological congruence, 2008–2016, in the Portuguese Parliament, taking into account the four scenarios presented above. Figure 6.1 presents the full distributions of left-right self-placement for both MPs (black lines) and voters (grey lines) for the five parties represented in the Portuguese Parliament,6 before and after the Great Recession. The increase in congruence for both the BE and the CDU can be best characterised as ‘confluential dynamic representation’: CDE and BE MPs are less extreme in 2016 than in 2008, while their voters’ preferences became more widespread (on the left). The case of the PSD can be best described as ‘top-down/from above representation’: both MPs and voters are more concentrated around the centre, in 2016 than in 2008, but the move is towards the previous MPs’ mode. In the case of the parties that witnessed a decrease in ideological congruence, the PS and the CDS-PP, are best described as ‘­disconnecting dynamic representation’: less centrist (i.e. more leftist) voters and stable MPs, in the case of the socialists; and more rightist MPs and more centrist voters, in the case of the CDS-PP. Let us move now to Spain, before and after the Great Recession, that is, 2007 and 2011. Table 6.5 provides a synthetic perspective of the levels of ideological congruence (MPs-citizens) for each party between 2007 and 2011. The figures for ‘congruence’ refer to the common areas (pictured in grey in Figure 6.2) in the distribution of left-right ideological preferences of MPs and citizens. In the Spanish Parliament, all four parties exhibited an increase in ideological congruence, between the period prior to the Great Recession (2007) and the middle of it (2011), with the highest among the socialists and the lowest among ERC MPs. The two largest national parties (PSOE and PP) are the more congruent ones, although in 2007 this was not the case for the PSOE (a parliamentary group much to the left of their voters), but Catalan

Table 6.5  Party-voters congruence (many-to-many) before and after the 2008 economic crisis, Spain

Party-voter’s ideological congruence before crisis

Party-voter’s ideological congruence after crisis

Congruence 2007 MPs (N) Voters (n) Congruence 2011 MPs (N) Voters (n)

PSOE 39.2 46 363 67 87 473 PP 52.8 34 209 66 83 577 CIU 33.3 3 16 58.8 4 53 ERC 50 2 10 58.3 2 24

Sources: Congruence 2007: IntUne Elites Survey Wave 1 (MPs) IntUne Mass Survey Wave 1 (voters), in Cotta, Isernia, and Bellucci, (2007a, 2007b); Congruence 2011: CIS studies ES2827 (MPs) and ES2930 (voters).

Figure 6.2  Ideological congruence between voters and MPs in Spain, before and after the crisis.

106  André Freire and Xavier Coller

nationalists were close behind. As said above, the studies about left-right ideological congruence on Spain are scarce, but the few existing studies reveal a Spanish Parliament that, overall, is biased towards the left (vis-à-vis a more centrist electorate), like in Portugal (Belchior 2010 and 2013). At the party level both the PSOE and IU (United Left, a radical left alliance with former communists within it) are the least congruent parties, and the PP and CiU the more congruent, especially the PP (Belchior 2010). Figure 6.2 shows the full distributions on the left-right self-placement for both MPs (black lines) and voters (grey lines), for the four parties for which we have survey data at both levels, PSOE (socialists), PP (conservatives), CIU (Catalan conservatives) and ERC (Catalan republican left), in the two periods (2007 and 2011), before and after the Great Recession. Taking into account these distributions of ideological preferences, we can conclude the following. The increase of congruence in both the PSOE and ERC can be best characterised as ‘top-down/from above representation’: socialist MPs more concentrated on the left, voters less centrist (overall) and moving towards the previous mode of the MPs; less dispersed ERC voters and moving towards the mode of the (previously) more homogenous and leftist MPs. In the cases of both the PP and the CiU the situation of increased left-right congruence can best be characterised as ‘confluential dynamic representation’: more rightist voters and less centrist MPs, in the case of the PP; more centrist MPs and more dispersed voters, in the case of CiU.

Conclusion

Summarising the findings in relation to the social distance between MPs and citizens, and comparing the two points in time before and after the Great Recession, in both countries, we conclude that in some respects (gender, age, education, profession), with different magnitudes, parliaments are ‘becoming closer’ to societies. The ISDS confirms this analysis. This is nothing but a trend that has been historically observed (Best and Cotta 2000), which is ratified in this analysis despite voices claiming that MPs do not socially represent societies. On the contrary, there is a tendency towards micro-­representation or demographic representation, that is, the gap between parliaments and societies is getting narrower rather than broader. This means that over the years, more social diversity has been added to parliaments, closing the gap with society and making parliament a closer representation of ­society—at least on the variables for which we have enough information to compare. Would it be different if we could compare income levels between MPs and citizens? Or additional factors, like religion or place of birth? These are questions to explore elsewhere. What also remains to be seen in future research, namely with comparisons with more historical depth, is the relative contribution of long-term trends vis-à-vis the Great Recession for the changes we mapped between 2001 and 2015. In terms of substantive representation, our research questions were: first, are there any effects of the Great Recession on the pattern of transformation

Social distance and ideological congruence  107

of votes into seats and, if so, in what direction? The answer is that there are significant effects for both Spain and Portugal. However, in the Spanish case we witnessed both a major change in the party system format (highly volatile elections and a huge increase in party system fragmentation, due to the entrance of two new medium-sized parties, Podemos and Ciudadanos) and a major change in the patterns of government alternation. In the case of Portugal, we witnessed no relevant change in the party system format, but a major change in the patterns of government alternation: for the first time in around 40 years of democracy the left-wing parties were able to cooperate to form a government. Second, in terms of left-right congruence between MPs and voters, are there signs of relevant changes after the Great Recession and, if so, in what direction? The Spanish data is limited because the latest time point is 2011 and the data neither includes Podemos nor Ciudadanos, let alone IU. These limitations notwithstanding, we detected more congruence between 2007 and 2011 for all the four parties analysed (PSOE, PP, ERC and CiU), although for different reasons; and we also found that the largest national parties are those that are more congruent (like in Portugal). The question that can be raised is whether this pattern would still hold in 2016–2018, namely due to the entrance of new parties and internal disarray in the PSOE and the PP. For the Portuguese case, we witnessed a more congruent radical left (BE and CDU) and a more congruent PSD, although for different reasons. In the cases of the PS and the CDS-PP, both less congruent in 2016 than in 2008, the reasons are also different: stable MPs and more leftist voters; more rightist MPs and more centrist voters, respectively. The questions for the future are different in the Portuguese case: will these trends consolidate in the 2019 general elections and what will the consequences be for the parties (considering that the findings for policy representation are significantly different)?

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the editors of this book for their helpful comments and Professor Modesto Escobar (Universidad de Salamanca) for his contribution in creating the SISD. We are very grateful to Pablo Domínguez Benavente and Augusta Correia for their help in providing the necessary data to write this chapter. We also thank Paul Rigg for the linguistic review.

Notes

1 Part of the analysis of this paper would not have been possible without the support of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through the research project “Citizens and parliamentarians in times of crisis and democratic renewal: the comparative case of Spain in the South of Europe” (CSO201678016-R) and the support of the Portuguese Science Foundation (FCT) “Crisis, Political Representation and Democratic Renewal: The Portuguese case in the Southern European context” (PTDC/IVC-CPO/3098/2014).

108  André Freire and Xavier Coller

2 See, for instance, Coller, Cordero, and Jaime-Castillo (2018) for some bias in the selection of politicians. 3 See Zweigenhaft and Domhoff (2006) for the case of the US. 4 Another way of looking at the differences in a systematic way is by using the difference of proportions between MPs and citizens on particular variables (e.g. gender, age) as Esaiasson and Holmberg (1996: 22) does. 5 Note that the use of more variables and the operationalisation of particular variables (such as age or profession) may produce different results. In fact, ISDS calculated by Coller et al. (2018) was 0.53 in 1981 and 0.84 in 2016. 6 The Left Bloc, BE; CDU: a coalition of the communist PCP with the Greens, PEV; the socialist PS; the center-right PSD; the conservative CDS-PP.

References

Andeweg, R. (2011) ‘Approaching Perfect Policy Congruence: Measurement, Development, and Relevance for Political Representation’, in Rosema, M., Denters, B., and Aarts, K. (eds.) Political Representation and Policy Congruence in Modern Societies, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 39–52. Belchior, A. (2010) ‘Ideological Congruence among European Political Parties’, The Journal of Legislative Studies, 16(1), 121–142. Belchior, A. and Freire, A. (2013) ‘Is Party Type Relevant to an Explanation of

­Policy Congruence? Catch-all versus Ideological Parties in the Portuguese Case’, ­International Political Science Review, 34(3), 273–288. Best, H. and Cotta, M. (eds.) (2000) Parliamentary Representatives in Europe

­1848–2000. Legislative Recruitments and Careers in Eleven European Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas – CIS (2009) Élites Políticas en España (2009–2011). Estúdio nº2827. Sevilla: Universidad Pablo de Olavide. Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas – CIS (2012) Congruencia Ideológica Entre Electores y Representantes Políticos. Estudio nº2930. Málaga: Universidad de Málaga. Coller, X. (2008) ‘El sesgo social de las elites políticas. El caso de la España de las autonomías (1980–2005)’, Revista de Estudios Políticos, 141, 133–159. Coller, X., Cordero, G., and Jaime-Castillo, A. (eds.) (2018) The Selection of Politicians in Times of Crisis, London: Routledge. Coller, X. and y Ramírez de Luis, F. (2019), ‘Unstable preferences and policy changes. The case of Spain’, in Morlino, L. and Sotilotta, C. (eds), The politics of the Eurozone crisis in Southern Europe: A comparative reappraisal, London: Palgrave. Coller, Xavier, Pablo Domínguez, Manuel Portillo y Modesto Escobar (2018), “Elites políticas en España. ¿Convergencia o divergencia con la sociedad?” en Pendas García, Benigno (Dir.), Esther González y Rafael Rubio, (coords.), España constitucional (1978–2018). Trayectorias y perspectivas, (Volume IV), Madrid: Centro de Estudios Políticos y Constitucionales, pp: 3363–85. Coller, X., Navarro, M., and Portillo, M. (2016) ‘Mitos y realidades de las elites políticas’, in Barreda, M. and Ruiz, L. M. (eds.) El análisis de la política. Enfoques y herramientas de la ciencia política, Barcelona: Huygens, 419–438. Coller, X. and Santana, A. (2009) ‘La homogeneidad social de la elite política. Los parlamentarios de los PANE (1980–2005)’, Papers, revista de sociología, 92, 29–50. Cotta, M., Isernia, P., and Bellucci, P. (2007a) IntUne Mass Survey Wave 1, Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. doi: 10.3886/ICPSR34421.v1 [Accessed 11-04-2013].

Social distance and ideological congruence  109

Cotta, M., Isernia, P., and Bellucci, P. (2007b) IntUne Political Elite Survey Wave 1. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. Esaiasson, P. and Holmberg, S. (1996) Representation from Above. Members of Parliament and Representative Democracy in Sweden, Aldershot: Dartmouth Publishing Company. Freire, A. (2009) ‘Biographies of Portuguese MPs, Elections 1975–2005 – ­Databases’, in Freire, A., Viegas, J. M., and Seiceira, F. (coord.) Representação Política em Portugal – Inquéritos e Bases de Dados, Lisboa: Sextante. Freire, A. (2015) ‘Left-Right Ideology as a Dimension of Identification and as a Dimension of Competition’, Journal of Political Ideologies, 20(1), 43–68. Freire, A. and Belchior, A. (2013) ‘Ideological Representation in Portugal: MPs-­

Electors Linkages in Terms of Left-Right Placement and Substantive Meaning’, Journal of Legislative Studies, 19(1), 1–21. Freire, A. and Lisi, M. (2016) ‘Introduction: Political Parties, Institutions and Civil Society: The Economic Crisis and the Evolution of Southern Europe Political Systems’, within the Dossier ‘Political Parties, Institutions and Civil Society: The Economic Crisis and the Evolution of Southern Europe Political Systems’, Portuguese Journal of Social Science, 15(2), 153–171. Freire, A., Lisi, M., and Tsatsanis, E. (2016a) ‘Inquérito aos Eleitores Portugueses 2016: Eleições 2015’, in Projeto de Investigação do CIES-IUL e do IPRI-NOVA, Crise, Representação Política e Renovação da Democracia: O caso Português no Contexto do Sul da Europa, FCT: PTDC/IVC-CPO/3098/2014, available online at: http://er.cies.iscte-iul.pt/ Freire, A., Lisi, M., and Tsatsanis, E. (2016b) ‘Portuguese Citizens Survey 2016’, Research Project at CIES-IUL and IPRI-NOVA, Crisis, Representation and Democratic Renewal: The Portuguese Case in the South European Context, FCT: PTDC/ IVC-CPO/3098/2014, available online: http://er.cies.iscte-iul.pt/ Freire, A., Lisi, M., and Tsatsanis, E. (2017) ‘Biographies of Portuguese MPs 2015 – Database’, Research Project at CIES-IUL and IPRI-NOVA, Crisis, Political Representation and Democratic Renewal: The Portuguese Case in the Southern European Context, FCT: PTDC/IVC-CPO/3098/2014, available online at: http:// er.cies.iscte-iul.pt/ Freire, A. and Viegas, J. M. L. (2008a) ‘Portuguese Citizens Survey 2008’, Research Project at ISCTE-IUL and CIES-IUL, Portuguese Deputies in Comparative Perspective: Elections, Leadership, and Political Representation, FCT: PTDC/ CPO/64469/2006, available online at: http://er.cies.iscte-iul.pt/ Freire, A. and Viegas, J. M. L. (2008b) ‘Portuguese MPs Survey: 2005 Legislative Election’, Research Project at ISCTE-IUL and CIES-IUL, Portuguese Deputies in Comparative Perspective: Elections, Leadership, and Political Representation, FCT: PTDC/CPO/64469/2006, available online at: http://er.cies.iscte-iul.pt/ Freire, A. Tsatsanis, E. and Risi, M. (2015), Freire, A., Tsatsanis, E., and Correia, A. (2018) ‘Ideological and Policy Representation in Portugal, Before and After the Great Recession, 2008–2017’, ECPR General Conference 2018, Panel 342, Political Representation in Post-Crisis Portugal: Change or Continuity?, Hamburg.Freire, A., Tsatsanis, E., and Lima, I. (2016) ‘Portugal in Times of Crisis: Value Change and Policy Representation’, in Malina Voicu, I., C. and Mochmann, H. D. (eds.) Values, Economic Crisis and Democracy. Abingdon: Routledge, 240–276.

110  André Freire and Xavier Coller

Gaxie, D. (2018) ‘Political and Social Backgrounds of Political Elites’, in Best, H. and Higley, J. (eds.) The Palgrave Handbook of Political Elites, London: Palgrave, 489–506. Genieys, W. (2017) The New Custodians of the State: Programmatic Elites in French Society, London: Routledge. Golder, M. and Stramski, J. (2010) ‘Ideological Congruence and Electoral Institutions’, American Journal of Political Science, 54(1), 90–106. Instituto Nacional de Estatística – INE (2002) Portuguese Census Data by INE 2001, online data available at: http://censos.ine.pt/xportal/xmain?xpgid=ine_censos_ indicadoresandxpid=CENSOS Kakepaki, M., Kountouri, F., Verzichelli, L., and Coller, X. (2018) ‘The Sociopolitical Profile of Parliamentary Representatives in Greece, Italy and Spain Before and After the Eurocrisis. A Comparative Empirical Assessment’, in Cordero, G. and Coller, X. (eds.) Democratizing Candidate Selection. New Methods, Old Receipts?, London: Palgrave, 175–200. Lisi, M. (2018) ‘The Limits of Party Change: Candidate Selection in Portugal in the Age of Crisis’, in Coller, X., Cordero, G., and Jaime, A. (eds.) The Selection of Politicians in Times of Crisis, London: Routledge, 206–225. Manin, B., Stokes, S. C., and Przeworski, A. (1999) ‘Elections and Representation’, in Przeworski, A., Stokes, S. C., and Manin, B. (eds.) Democracy, Accountability and Representation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 29–54. Mansbridge, J. (1999) ‘Should Blacks Represent Blacks and Women Represent Women? A Contingent “Yes”’, The Journal of Politics, 61(3), 628–657. Méndez-Lago, M. and Martínez, A. (2002) ‘Political Representation in Spain: An Empirical Analysis of the Perception of Citizens and MPs’, The Journal of Legislative Studies, 8(1), 63–90. Mills, C. W. (1956) The Power Elite. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Miller, W. E. and Stokes, D. E. (1963) ‘Constituency Influence in Congress’, American Political Science Review, 57(1), 45–56.Norris, P. and Lovenduski, J. (1995) Political Recruitment. Gender, Race and Class in the British Parliament. New York: Cambridge University Press. Phillips, A. (1995) The Politics of Presence. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Pitkin, H. (1967) The Concept of Representation. Berkeley: University of California Press. Powell, G. B. (2004) ‘Political Representation in Comparative Politics’, Annual Review of Political Science, 7, 273–296. Putnam, R. (1976) The Comparative Study of Political Elites. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Sánchez-Ferrer, L. (2018) ‘Ideology: The Reasons Behind Placement on the LeftRight Scale’, in Coller, X., Jaime-Castillo, A., and Mota, F. (eds.) Political Power in Spain. The Multiple Divides Between MPs and Citizens, London: Palgrave, 225–244. Santana, A., Aguilar, S., and Coller, X. (2016) ‘Who Leads and Who Lags Behind? Women MPs in the Spanish Regional Parliaments’, Revista Internacional de Sociología, 74(2), e033. doi: 10.3989/ris.2016.74.2.033 Wessels, B. (2007) ‘Political Representation and Democracy’, in Dalton, R. and Klingemann, H-D. (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Political Behavior, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 833–850. Zweigenhaft, R. L. and Domhoff, W. (2006) Diversity in the Power Elite. How It Happened, Why It Matters. Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.

Introduction

The degree of diversity found in legislatures is a crucial dimension against which we can assess the quality of representation in liberal democracies. Existing work on political representation consistently suggests that white older heterosexual fully abled middle-class men still dominate parliaments. Not only are they more numerous, but white males are also the “ideal” or “prototypical” seat-holder; that is, the one that a majority of electors and party selectors have in mind when thinking about political representatives (Purdie-Vaughns and Eibach 2008; Kenny and Verge 2016). The “diversity gap”, – the skewed social composition of legislatures – not only structures how political institutions operate, but it also may also contribute to shaping hegemonic cultural perspectives of race, class, gender, ethnicity, age, ableness and sexuality (Norris and Lovenduski 1995). In this chapter, we deal with the following research question: to what extent do parliamentarians in Iberian legislatures reflect the social diversity in the population at large? Descriptive representation – herein defined as “who the representatives are” – matters for multiple reasons. First, the “diversity gap” in political office leads to a serious democratic deficit with relevant implications for democratic politics (Phillips 1998). While MPs are expected to represent the interests of the society as a whole, what a legislator “stands for” in terms of descriptive representation is connected to what (s)he will “act for” regarding substantive representation (Mansbridge 1999). Research on the political representation of gender and ethnicity has shown that the number of women and ethnic minorities in legislatures influences the likelihood of approval of equality and non-discrimination bills (SchwindtBayer and Mishler 2005; Wüst 2014). Likewise, openly LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender) MPs help to bolster rights for their community and, at the same time, transform the perceptions and voting behaviour of their non-LGBT counterparts (Haider-Markel 2010; Reynolds 2013). On the contrary, the literature suggests that the absence of disabled people from parliaments has created hurdles to shift “the guiding principle of ‘welfare’

7 The diversity gap in the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments

Descriptive representation through an intersectional perspective

Ana Espírito-Santo, Tània Verge and Laura Morales

112  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

toward the principles of ‘citizenship’ and ‘rights’” (Drake 2001: 423). The chronic underrepresentation of young people also raises issues about their substantive representation in legislatures (IPU 2016). Second, the composition of parliaments evokes particular meanings to citizens (Pitkin 1967). MPs from minority and historically discriminated social groups may bring a symbolic value insofar as their bodily presence increases the legitimacy of, closeness to and satisfaction with political institutions. Furthermore, their presence may also heighten the levels of political efficacy of the citizens belonging to such groups, providing them with role models and signalling that politics is an arena open to their participation (Espírito-Santo and Verge 2017). Existing research on the compositional similarity between the representatives and the represented in Iberian parliaments has mostly focused on gender (Valiente et al. 2004; Meirinho Martins and Pequito Teixeira 2005; Baum and Espírito-Santo 2012; Monteiro 2011; Verge and Espírito-Santo 2016; Verge et al. 2017). The representation of immigrants has benefited from a few studies (Pérez-Nievas et al. 2014; Vintila and Morales 2018). This chapter constitutes the first foray at examining the descriptive representation of social groups that have been traditionally excluded from politics and whose underrepresentation strongly correlates with patterns of socioeconomic injustice and/or lack of recognition. More specifically, it pays attention to the various forms of discrimination that structure privilege and power dynamics in political institutions like gender, age, ethnicity, sexuality and ableness. In doing so, we adopt an intersectional approach – that is, we focus on how gender interacts with other identity markers. Our analysis uses an original biographical dataset of MPs. Our window of observation focuses on two legislative terms, namely the terms 2000–2004 and 2016–2016 for Spain, and the terms 2002–2005 and 2015–2018 for Portugal. Such empirical strategy permits us to investigate the evolution of the descriptive representation of the abovementioned social groups before and after the adoption of statutory gender quotas (2006 in Portugal and 2007 in Spain). Furthermore, it also enables us to assess how political parties – the primary gatekeepers to elected office in parliamentary democracies – have sought (or not) to promote the descriptive representation of each social group. The chapter is structured as follows. First, we review the body of scholarship within which we place our study. Second, we describe the data and methods used. Subsequently, we examine the diversity gap in political representation in the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments. Lastly, we evaluate the degree of inclusiveness of the Iberian legislatures and present our conclusions.

An intersectional approach to the study of the diversity gap in parliaments

The descriptive representation of women has benefited from a burgeoning body of scholarly (see, among many others, Dahlerup and Leyenaar 2013; Paxton

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  113

and Hughes 2014). To a less extent, the study of ethnic minorities and immigrants in legislatures has also gained traction (Ruedin 2009; Bird et al. 2011; Wüst 2014). This body of scholarly work points out to an increasing presence of women and a steady poor representation of ethnic minorities and immigrants. By contrast, very little is known about other underprivileged social groups (Lamprinakou et al. 2017). There is a dearth of scholarly work on the political representation of the LGBT community (but see Rayside 1998; ­Haider-Markel 2010; Everitt and Camp 2014). Between 1976 and 2011 only 151 LGBT MPs had been elected to the national assemblies of 27 countries ­(Reynolds 2013: 260). In the case of disabled people, empirical work is especially scarce, and it mostly comes from statutory non-departmental public bodies (FRA 2014), or anecdotal evidence reporting a minimal presence – for example, in the UK parliament, less than 1 per cent of MPs are disabled (Ryan 2017). Recently, a burgeoning strand of research has adopted an intersectional approach by examining the descriptive representation of women from ethnic and racial minorities (Ruedin 2010; Hughes 2013). Such an approach implies looking at the intersection of two markers of identity, which is not a mere addition of various sources of inequality (Crenshaw 1989). Instead, a compounded and reinforced type of inequality may emerge (Collins 2000). An intersectional approach changes the question from “To what degree are women politically empowered” to “Which women are politically empowered?”, that is, “To what degree are women of color, immigrant women, indigenous women, working-class women, and lesbian and bisexual women politically empowered?” (Hughes and Dubrow 2018: 81). Age has been found to intersect with gender in specific ways. The majority of women MPs are in their 40s and 50s, whereas younger and older women are less well represented (IPU 2016: 12). The sexual division of labour that assigns women the lion’s share of care work explains the higher absence of mothers as compared to fathers from the ranks of parliament, as has been found in the British and Spanish cases (Campbell and Childs 2014; Verge et al. 2017). Other studies point out that power dynamics underpin the intersection of age and gender. As noted by Burness (2000: 97) in her study of the Swedish parliament, the promotion of young women signals “something new and vital” but older men hold onto political power. While diversity is formally assured, the “prototypical” men remain in their positions. Regarding ethnicity and migrant origin, studies have shown that in some countries ethnic minority women MPs outnumber ethnic minority men MPs (e.g. Celis et al. 2014; Hughes and Dubrow 2018), but this is not a pattern found across all established democracies. Thus, a “competitive advantage” may develop in specific contexts whereby ethnic minority women are perceived as less threatening to the majority population than ethnic minority men (Celis et al. 2015). Concerning LGBT MPs, while their presence has increased over time, cross-national studies show that very few of them have been from a minority

114  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

ethnic group. Moreover, openly gay men tend to outnumber lesbians – about three to one (Reynolds 2013). As Juvonen (2016) notes in the German case, openly lesbian politicians receive less media attention and lower approval rates from both the public and their parties than gay politicians, and the former also present higher turnover rates. As for ableness, despite the lack of official statistics on the political representation of women and men with disabilities, gender disparities in education, higher unemployment rates amongst women with disabilities, and the fact that they face disproportionately higher rates of ­gender-based violence and sexual abuse may explain women’s lower political engagement (Schur 2003). Although we know little about how gender and disability interact (Guldvik et al. 2013), female representatives with disabilities may be affected by stereotypes based on both their sex and ability (Connors 2015). Ultimately, the empirical findings on Western liberal democracies suggest that, albeit slow and imperfect, there has been a growth in the inclusion of minorities in legislatures. Our expectation for the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments is that they have witnessed a similarly limited increase in diversity over time. How the different markers of identity analysed here intersect with gender, as well as cross-party variance concerning group representation, is an open empirical question that our original database of MPs allows exploring for the first time in the Iberian legislatures.

Data and methods

Unlike other parliaments, such as the British House of Commons, the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments do not publish official reports on the diversity of MPs. To be sure, in the Spanish case, there is an official report on descriptive representation focusing exclusively on gender. The Spanish gender quota law includes a provision that establishes that the government must produce a report after each election surveying the implementation of the legislated electoral gender quota passed in 2007. The said law mandates that party lists must include a minimum of 40 per cent and a maximum of 60 per cent of either sex, a proportion to be met as well in each stretch of five candidates. Non-compliant lists shall be withdrawn by the electoral authorities (Verge 2012). In Portugal, the Parity Law (2006) established that party lists must include at least a third of candidates of either sex and neither sex shall occupy more than two consecutive positions, with financial penalties being applied to non-compliant parties (Baum and Espírito-Santo 2012). No official reports are published in Portugal as regards the effective implementation of quotas, in any case. To make an empirical appraisal of diversity in Iberian legislatures, we use an original biographical dataset of all MPs who held a seat at some point during two selected legislatures. Data for Spain is an extension of the Pathways project, whereas for Portugal the authors collected their data. We

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  115

concentrate on the 2000–2004 and the short 2016–2016 legislative term. Legislative terms for Spain, and the 2002–2005 and the 2015–2018 legislative terms for Portugal.1 Our sampling strategy covers one period before the implementation of the statutory gender quotas and one period after that. Our sample includes 630 biographical records for Portugal and 767 for Spain, some of which correspond to MPs that served in both terms. For most of the variables, we disaggregate the data by political party. For Portugal, we include the Social Democratic Party/Partido Social Demócrata (PSD), the Portuguese Socialist Party/Partido Socialista (PS), the Portuguese Communist Party/Partido Comunista Português (PCP), the Democratic Social Centre/Centro Democrático Social (CDS-PP), the Left Block/ Bloco de Esquerda (BE) and the People, Animals and Nature Party/Pessoas Animais e Natureza (PAN). For Spain, we focus on statewide parties: the Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party/Partido Socialista Obrero Español (PSOE), the Popular Party/Partido Popular (PP), Citizens/Ciudadanos (Cs), United Left/Izquierda Unida (IU) and We Can/Podemos (Ps). Our analysis comes with methodological caveats. First, there are legal constraints that prevent foreign nationals from being eligible candidates for national elections (Oliveira and Carvalhais 2017). Therefore, we follow the definition used by the Pathways project (Morales et al. 2017) whereby we code MPs as having an immigrant background when they have been born abroad with a foreign nationality or either of their parents were born abroad with a foreign nationality. For the Portuguese case, MPs official biographies are not standardised. Moreover, their nationality and that of their parents’ at birth (or even currently) is extremely hard to find.2 We were for the most part only able to collect systematic information about the country of birth, but not the MPs’ original nationality or that of their parents (with the exception of Table 7.1, where we present the first MPs with immigrant backgrounds).3

To measure ethnicity, we turn to two different indicators. First, we measure whether citizens may perceive MPs as belonging to a minority. Trained coders were asked to classify any MP as a ‘visible’ minority member when they could be perceived as such either by their physical appearance in pictures or by their names.4 Second, we classify MPs as being part of an ethnic minority if the MP self-identifies as a member of any ethnic minority. For our purposes, an ethnic group is defined as a group of people whose members identify with each other through a common heritage, often consisting of a common language, a common culture (which can include a religion) and/or a belief in common ancestry (Morales et al. 2017).5

Regarding our LGBT indicator, we only classify MPs if they publicly self-identified as such at the time of their election. Finally, in the case of ableness, only visible or publically self-declared disabilities are considered. In order to identify both LGBT or disabled MPs, trained coders checked for statements relating to sexual orientation and gender identity and watched videos to ascertain any apparent disability for the MPs studied.

116  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

Diversity representation outcomes in the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments

By and large, the election of the first MP from each social group is a significant event, one that encroaches upon the symbolic domain of politics. That is mainly the case when the marker of identity is visible, when it is intentionally made public, and when it captures media attention. For instance,

Table 7.1  First MPs from each of the underrepresented social groupsa

Portugal Spain

Women 1934 & 1975 1931 & 1977 Immigrant background 1976 (Narana Coissoró, CDS, Portuguese from Indian parents); 1992 (Fernando Ká, PS, Portuguese from Guinean parents)

From mixed marriages, 1977 (several, e.g. Joaquín Garrigues Walker, Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD), US mother; Enrique Múgica Herzog, PSOE, French mother; Fernando Jorge Portillo Scharfhausen, UCD, Swedish mother) No fully migrant origin MP Fully migrant origin, 1993 (Teófilo de Luis Rodríguez, PP, Cuba, from Spanish grandparents); 2018 (Mohammed Chaib Akhdim, PSCPSOE) for the first non-Latin American fully migrant origin MP

Ethnic minority 1976 (Narana Coissorób, CDS); 1992 (Fernando Ká, PS and Manuel Correia, PCP)

1977 (first Roma MP – Juan de Dios Ramírez Heredia, UCD and later PSOE); 2016 (first black MP, from Equatorial Guinea, Rita Bosaho Gori, Ps)

Gay 2009 (Miguel Vale de Almeida, PS) 1999 (Miquel Iceta, PSC-PSOE)c

Lesbian 2018 (Sandra Cunha, BE) 2011 (Ángeles Álvarez, PSOE)d

Bisexual – 2016 (Ángela Rodríguez Martínez, Ps-En Marea)

Transgender – –

Disability 2015 (Jorge Falcato, BE) 2004 (Francisco Vañó Ferre & José Oreiro Rodríguez, PP)

a  Age is not relevant here since each legislative term has its youngest MP. b  As a descendant of Brahmin Goans, which comprises an elite group (also seen as such by Portuguese citizens), it is questionable whether he was perceived as integrating an ethnic minority (see Almeida 2014). c  He outed when he was about to leave his seat to run for the Catalan parliament elections. Jerónimo Saavedra (PP) also outed in 2000 when he was a senator, after having been an MP for about two decades. d  She publicly came out in 2013; however, she married in 2005 to her partner in a semi-­public event at the Madrid city council that was well attended by the PSOE leadership, so her sexual orientation was public knowledge at the very least within PSOE by the time she was ­nominated in 2011.

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  117

the election of Jorge Falcato in 2015, the first disabled MP in Portugal, had a significant impact on the news.6 As did Rita Bosaho Gori’s election in Spain, in 2016, as the first black MP. Table 7.1 shows a relatively similar picture for both countries, with Spain having elected the first MPs of the various diversity groups slightly earlier. Women joined both parliaments for the first time in the 1930s. Both the Portuguese and Spanish lower houses have included ethnic minority MPs since the late 1970s. With regards to immigrant background, in Spain, the first elected MPs had one of the parents (typically, the mother) of foreign – predominantly Western – origin. In Portugal, the first MPs with an immigrant background were born abroad in countries under Portuguese colonial rule (in Goa and Guinea), but to parents with foreign nationality. The inclusion of citizens with a fully migrant origin did not occur until the mid-1990s in Spain, and it has yet to occur in Portugal. Spain also preceded Portugal as regards the election of the first outed gay and lesbian MPs, and only Spain has seen the election of a bisexual MP. No openly transgender or intersex MP has ever served in the Portuguese or Spanish lower houses, but one trans woman (Carla Antonelli, PSOE) was elected in the Madrid regional parliament in 2011, and one trans man (Guillem Montoro, Compromís) became a local councillor in Paiporta (Valencia) in 2018. In turn, the BE included (in a non-winnable position) the first trans candidate in Portugal (a trans woman, Júlia Mendes Pereira) for the 2015 legislative elections. Lastly, Spain elected the first visibly disabled MP in the early 2000s, whereas Portugal took an extra decade to do so. Next, we turn to the analysis of the “diversity gap” in the two legislative periods under examination. Concerning the representation of women, both countries witnessed a vital growth. In Portugal, the percentage of women increased from 19.6 per cent (2002) to 33 per cent (2015). In Spain, there has also been an increase from 28 per cent (2000) to 39 per cent (2016). How have the various political parties performed regarding gender outcomes? Whereas in the Portuguese case statutory quotas have substantially boosted women’s representation, in Spain the legislated quota has only had a substantial impact on those parties not using already voluntary party quotas (Verge and Espírito-Santo 2016). As Table 7.2 shows, women’s presence increased across almost all political parties between the two periods. In ­Portugal, the introduction of the gender quota law blurred the difference between the two largest parties (PS and PSD). By contrast, in Spain, the PSOE keeps surpassing the PP. In the most recent legislature under examination, Ps and the PCP (in Spain and Portugal, respectively) outperform all other parties. Similar to most countries, in Iberian legislatures, there is an overwhelming tendency for parliamentarians to be middle-aged. In Portugal, MPs’ average age was 46.1 years at the time of their election in the 2002–2005 term and 47.6 at the start of the 2015–2018 term, as can be seen in Table 7.3. Around 60 per cent of MPs are between 41 and 60 years old. The situation in Spain is relatively similar, with an average age of 46.7 years at the time of the election for the 2000–2004 term, and of 48.5 at the beginning of the 2016–2016 term. In order to examine the intersection of gender and age,

118  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

Table 7.2  Female MPs by political party, number and percentage

Portugal Spain

2002–2005 (%) 2015–2018 (%) 2000–2004 (%) 2016–2016 (%)

BE n = 6; 20 3 (50) 7 (35) Cs n = −; 40 – 8 (20) CDS n = 27; 24 3 (11) 9 (38) IU n = 8; 5 2 (25) 2 (40) PAN n = −; 1 – 0 (0) Ps n = −; 47 – 24 (51) PCP n = 13; 16 4 (31) 7 (44) PP n = 226; 120 67 (30) 44 (37) PEV n = 4; 2 2 (50) 1 (50) PSOE (+PSC) n = 137; 89 51 (37) 41 (46) PS n = 129; 122 28 (22) 45 (37) PSD n = 160; 106 24 (15) 39 (38)

Table 7.3  MPs by age cohort and gender, numbers and percentage

18–30 (%) 31–40 (%) 41–50 (%) 51–60 (%) +61 (%)

Portugal 2002–2005 Total n = 336 29 (9) 75 (22) 112 (33) 95 (29) 25 (7) Women n = 63 8 (13) 9 (14) 21 (33) 21 (33) 4 (6) Men n = 273 21 (8) 66 (24) 91 (33) 74 (27) 21 (8) 2015–2018 Total n = 291 17 (6) 63 (22) 92 (32) 79 (27) 40 (14) Women n = 108 7 (6) 24 (22) 38 (35) 27 (25) 12 (11) Men n = 183 10 (5) 39 (21) 54 (30) 52 (28) 28 (15) Spain 2000–2004 Total n = 416 20 (5) 88 (21) 148 (36) 140 (34) 20 (5) Women n = 131 13 (10) 37 (28) 44 (34) 37 (28) 0 (0) Men n = 285 7 (2) 51 (18) 104 (36) 103 (36) 20 (7) 2016–2016 Total n = 351 11 (3) 68 (19) 116 (33) 121 (34) 35 (10) Women n = 138 8 (6) 26 (19) 59 (43) 32 (23) 13 (9) Men n = 213 3 (1) 42 (20) 57 (27) 89 (42) 22 (10)

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  119

Table 7.3 also includes the percentage of women and men MPs by age cohort. Whereas the Portuguese case reveals the absence of any clear pattern, in Spain we can see that women are more likely to be younger than male MPs (especially from the 18–30 group) and less likely to be from the cohorts above 51 years. The emergence of new parties has failed yet to rejuvenate the Spanish Parliament, although MPs from Cs and, mainly, from Ps are relatively younger than MPs from the PSOE and the PP, as Table 7.4 shows. In Portugal, whereas in the 2002–2005 term two radical left-wing parties, namely the BE and the PEV, had significantly younger parliamentarians (average below 40 years), in the most recent legislature age differences across parties have vanished. Regarding immigrant background, in the two Portuguese legislative terms under examination over 20 MPs were not born in the country, representing 6 per cent in 2002–2005 and 8 per cent in 2015–2018, as reported in Table 7.5. Portuguese ex-colonies dominate the countries where those MPs were born: half of them were born in Angola and 23 per cent in Mozambique. However, most of these MPs cannot be considered of “immigrant” background insofar as they were probably born with Portuguese nationality, possibly with at least one of the parents born abroad with a foreign nationality. In Spain, four MPs of immigrant origin have been identified in both legislative terms, which represent approximately 1 per cent of the total pool of MPs. Most of them (three out of four of them for the 2000–2004 term, and two out of four for the 2016–2016 term) were born in Spain to one parent of foreign origin. Over the two legislative terms, only two MPs in total were first-generation migrants. For all the rapid growth of immigrant

Table 7.4  Average age of MPs by political party (Portugal and Spain)

Portugal Spain

2002–2005 2015–2018 2000–2004 2016–2016

BE n = 6; 20 37.8 47.0 Cs n = −; 40 – 45.9

CDS n = 27; 24 46.8 45.4 IU n = 8; 5 50.0 44.0

PAN n = −; 1 – 39.0 Ps n = −; 47 – 40.3

PCP n = 13; 16 45.5 44.1 PP n = 226; 120 45.9 52.6

PEV n = 4; 2 37.0 49.5 PSOE (+PSC) n = 137; 89 47.9 49.0

PS n = 129; 122 48.9 49.8 PSD n = 157; 106 44.3 46.4

120  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

population in Spain, which reaches around 20 per cent when the children of first-­generation immigrants are included, such low numbers have remained stable over time (Vintila and Morales 2018). The figures increase for MPs born abroad (ten in the 2000–2004 term and eight in the 2016–2016 term), mostly the children of Spanish emigrants or individuals who just happened to be born abroad to Spanish parents. Turning to ethnicity, in Portugal, of the 604 MPs of our sample, ten are likely to be perceived by citizens as belonging to an ethnic minority either by their physical appearance or by their names (Identifiable minority; six in the first legislative term analysed and four in the second one). However, only six self-identify as belonging to an ethnic minority (Ethnic ID – see Appendix for more details). The two groups do not entirely overlap. Only three of those ten who are perceived as belonging to an ethnic minority self-identify as such, whereas three MPs do not have visible traits revealing their belonging to an ethnic minority and yet they consider themselves to belong to one. The differences between the two legislative periods analysed for both indicators of ethnicity are not significant, as reported in Table 7.5.

Table 7.5  MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by gender, number and percentage

Not born in PT/SP (%) Immigrantorigin (%) Identifiable minority (%) Ethnic ID (%)

Portugal 2002–2005 Total n = 339 22 (6) –   6 (2) 3 (1) Women n = 64 6 (9) –   1 (2) 2 (3) Men n=275 16 (6) –   5 (2) 1 (0) 2015–2018 Total n = 291 24 (8) –   4 (1) 4 (1) Women n = 108 9 (8) –   2 (2) 1 (1) Men n = 183 15 (8) –   2 (1) 3 (2) Spain 2000–2004 Total n = 416 10 (2) 4 (1) 0 (0) 6 (1) Women n = 131 4 (3) 1 (1) 0 (0) 3 (2) Men n = 285 6 (2) 3 (1) 0 (0) 3 (1) 2016–2016 Total n = 351 8 (2) 4 (1) 2 (1) 16 (5) Women n = 138 3 (2) 3 (2) 2 (1) 7 (5) Men n = 213 5 (2) 1 (0.5) 0 (0) 9 (4)

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  121

In Spain, only two MPs (less than 1 per cent) of the 2016–2016 term are likely to be perceived by voters as belonging to an ethnic minority, but they do not self-identify as such in their public statements. With regards to intersectionality, while both men and women with immigrant or ethnic minority backgrounds are massively under-represented, we observe a higher presence of men (in absolute numbers) from these groups in both legislatures and the two terms under examination. Both in Portugal and Spain, there is no significant difference between left-wing and right-wing parties in their likelihood to include candidates of immigrant (or foreign birth) origin, as reported in Table 7.6, for Portugal, and Table 7.7, for Spain. The performance is equally poor across the board, and no party stands out as “immigrant-candidates friendly”, despite relevant differences in their positions on the issues of migration flow controls and immigrant integration (cf. Carvalho 2009). The same can be said for ethnicity. In both countries, party size emerges as the strongest predictor for including MPs from an immigrant background or ethnic minorities. As for the inclusion of LGBT people, country differences are remarkable, despite it being a recent phenomenon in both parliaments, as already mentioned. In Spain, for the 2016–2016 term, six openly LGBT MPs (three men and three women) were elected (three from the PSOE and three from the radical-left coalition integrated by IU and Ps), constituting nearly 2 per cent of MPs. In Portugal, just one openly gay MP (from the PS) competed and got elected at the 2015 election. Furthermore, while no differences were found between the two legislative periods in the categories of age, immigration background and (partially) ethnic minority, in the case of sexual orientation both countries went from zero representatives in the first legislative period to some occurrences in the second one. The small-N problem does not enable us to draw definite conclusions about political parties and the intersection of gender with sexuality. However, it should be noted that all openly LGBT MPs were elected with leftwing parties. Similarly, the fact that in both countries men were the first ones to come out – combined with the higher number of gay politicians – found in other institutions as compared to lesbian politicians suggests that it might be easier for men than for women to advance their political careers as openly homosexuals. Finally, in the case of ableness, Spain emerges again as a slightly more inclusive case than Portugal. In Spain, in the two legislative terms under examination, there were no visibly disabled MPs, but there have been at least three visibly disabled MPs in previous legislative terms since 2004 (all of men and from the PP). In Portugal, the only disabled MP, also a man (from the BE), serves in the current legislature. Although the PS included a blind female candidate in a winnable position in the 2015 elections, she remained one position away from entering the parliament. Overall, an intersection between gender and ableness seems to emerge, although the low number of cases calls for caution in drawing any firm conclusion.

Table 7.6  MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by political party, number and percentage, Portugal

BE CDS PAN PCP PEV PS PSD

2002–2005 (n = 6) (%)

2015–2018 (n = 20) (%)

2002–2005 (n = 27) (%)

2015–2018 (n = 24) (%)

2002– 2005 2015–2018 (n = 1) (%)

2002–2005 (n = 13) (%)

2015–2018 (n = 16) (%)

2002–2005 (n = 4) (%)

2015–2018 (n = 2) (%)

2002–2005 (n = 129) (%)

2015–2018 (n = 122) (%)

2002–2005 (n = 160) (%)

2015–2018 (n = 106) (%)

Not born in Portugal 1 (17) 1 (5) 4 (15) 3 (13) – 0 (0) 0 (0) 2 (13) 0 (0) 0 (0) 9 (7) 9 (7) 8 (5) 9 (8) Immigrant origin – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

Identifiable minority 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (4) 1 (4) – 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 2 (2) 1 (1) 3 (2) 3 (3) Ethnic ID 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (4) 1 (4) – 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (1) 2 (2) 1 (1) 1 (1)

Table 7.7  MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by political party, number and percentage, Spain

Cs IU Ps PP PSOE+PSC

2000–2004 (n = 0) (%)

2016–2016 (n = 40) (%)

2000–2004 (n = 8) (%)

2016–2016 (n = 5) (%)

2000–2004 (n = 0) (%)

2016–2016 (n = 47) (%)

2000–2004 (n = 226) (%)

2016–2016 (n = 120) (%)

2000–2004 (n = 137) (%)

2016–2016 (n = 89) (%)

Not born in Spain – 1 (2) 0 (0) 0 (0) – 0 (0) 7 (3) 1 (1) 2 (1) 3 (3) Immigrant origin – 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) – 1 (2) 2 (1) 2 (1) 2 (1) 0 (0) Identifiable minority – 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) – 2 (4) 2 (1) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) Ethnic ID – 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (20) – 0 (0) 3 (1) 2 (2) 3 (2) 4 (4)

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  123

Conclusion

Using an original dataset, this chapter has examined the diversity gap in the Iberian legislatures. The evaluation of the diversity outcomes achieved by the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments yields a mixed picture. ­Women’s descriptive representation has significantly increased over the last ­decade. In September 2018, Spain ranked fifth among European parliaments whereas Portugal ranked twelfth (IPU 2018) regarding the percentage of women representatives. Similar to other European parliaments, the other minority groups remain remarkably underrepresented, although Spain has been slightly faster at including the first MPs of traditionally excluded groups. Whereas Portugal outperforms Spain as regards the inclusion of MPs from ethnic minorities, Spain outperforms Portugal in the representation of LGBT and disabled MPs. Overall, none of the examined groups reaches a representational level that mirrors their numerical presence in society. The social group for which descriptive representation has grown the most between the early 2000s and the late 2010s is LGBT people. While some cross-party differences have been observed, all political parties contribute to the maintenance of a remarkable diversity gap in Iberian legislatures. The tendency for left-wing parties to elect more women representatives than right-wing parties in both countries has not thus far led to significant gains for other underrepresented groups, except for LGBT MPs and the inclusion of younger MPs – in the latter case only by the newest radical left parties. Regarding how gender may intersect with other markers of identity, although the small-N problem underpinning our analysis prevents us from drawing firm conclusions, our results suggest that gender produces specific effects on the representation of the various social groups. In the case of youth, we see that women MPs tend to be younger (only in Spain) than men MPs. In the case of other social groups, men are more present in the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments than women. Ethnic minority and immigrant background male MPs outnumber female MPs with similar characteristics. Likewise, gay men are more likely to obtain representation than lesbians. For their part, disabled women have not yet been present in the Iberian legislatures. This initial foray on the diversity gap in the Iberian legislatures opens several avenues for further research. On the one hand, since political parties are the gatekeepers to elected office in both countries, scholars should explore the diversity strategies they develop to increase the presence of underrepresented groups, looking at both participatory structures (sub-party sections, working groups, loose networks or collateral organisations) and equality guarantees (quotas or representation goals). On the other hand, the measures adopted by the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments to become ­gender-sensitive institutions, to promote the access of minority-group MPs, and to guarantee non-discrimination during their tenure should be examined.

124  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to acknowledge the research funding that contributed to this research. The data for the biographical information on Spanish MPs was initially collected with funding allocated to the Pathways Project (www. pathways.eu/) by the ESRC under the Open Research Area scheme, jointly with the Dutch NWO, French ANR and German DFG (ESRC grant number ES/L016664/1) and was extended to new diversity variables with the support of the grant INCLUSIVEPARL funded by Sciences Po. Data on Portuguese MPs was collected with the support of the PhD Program in Political Science at ISCTE-IUL (Bolsas do 3º Ciclo).

Notes

1 The December 2015 elections yielded no successful investiture vote and new elections were called in June 2016. 2 Therefore, we sent a short questionnaire with critical questions about nationality to MPs of the two selected legislative terms who were not born in Portugal and/or whose surname indicated that one of the parents might be from a foreign country. Most MPs, however, did not reply to our request. 3 Both for Portugal and Spain no special analytical differentiation was introduced in the case of MPs born in ex-colonies. They were treated as MPs who were born abroad and, as in the case of the other MPs, the relevant information for determining their immigrant background was the MP’s nationality at birth and the nationality of her/his parents at birth. 4 In Portugal, as citizens have multiple names and can choose which ones to use predominantly, MPs were considered to be perceived as potential members of a visible minority only when their foreign-sounding name or surname is one of the names they chose to use. In Spain, both surnames and all first names were considered. 5 We do not include here national minorities in Spain (e.g. Basque, Catalan, Galician, and so forth) for reasons of relevance to the case, though they are considered as ethnic minorities in the Pathways project. 6 The Portuguese parliament had been remodelled to accommodate a wheelchair, and Jorge Falcato fell from his chair the first time he used the lift to reach the pulpit.

References

Almeida, S. J., 2014. António Costa, um político para além da cor da pele. Público [Online], 24 November. Available from: www.publico.pt/2014/11/24/politica/noticia/antonio-costapolitico-para-alem-da-cor-da-pele-1677000 [Accessed 20 July 2018]. Baum, M. and Espírito-Santo, A., 2012. Portugal’s quota-parity law: An analysis of its adoption. West European Politics, 35 (2), 319–342. Bird, K., Saalfeld, T. and Wüst, A. M., eds., 2011. The political representation of immigrants and minorities. Voters, parties and parliaments in liberal democracies. New York: Routledge. Burness, C., 2000. Young Swedish members of parliament: Changing the world?. NORA – Nordic Journal of Feminist and Gender Research, 8 (2), 93–106.

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  125

Campbell, R. and Childs, S., 2014. Parents in parliament, where’s mum?. Political Quarterly, 85 (4), 487–492. Carvalho, J., 2009. A política de imigração do Estado Português entre 1991 e 2004 [online]. Lisboa: ACIDI. Available from: www.animar-dl.pt/documentacao/pdf/108migracoes/564-a-politica-de-imigracao-do-estado-portugues-­entre-1991-e-2004 [Accessed 1 October 2018]. Celis, K., Silvia E. and Mügge, L., 2015. Intersectional puzzles: Understanding inclusion and equality in political recruitment, Politics & Gender, 11 (4), 765–770. Celis, K., Silvia, E., Mügge, L. and Damstra, A., 2014. Quotas and intersectionality: Ethnicity and gender in candidate selection. International Political Science Review, 35 (1), 41–54. Collins, P. H., 2000. Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness and the politics of empowerment. New York: HarperCollins. Connors, J., 2015. Political participation: Where are women with disabilities?. Entry in the blog Regarding Rights, Centre for International Governance and Justice, Australia [online]. Available from: http://asiapacific.anu.edu.au/­regardingrights/2015/11/13/political-participation-where-are-women-with-disabilities/ ­[Accessed 4 March 2018]. Crenshaw, K. W., 1989. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. University of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989 (1), 139–167. Dahlerup, D. and Leyenaar, M., eds., 2013. Breaking male dominance in old democracies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Drake, R. E., 2001. Welfare states and disabled people. In: G. L. Albrecht, K. D. Seelman and M. Bury, eds. Handbook of disability studies. London: Sage, 412–429. Espírito-Santo, A. and Verge, T., 2017. The elusive measurement of symbolic effects on citizens’ political attitudes. Politics, Groups and Identities, 5 (3), 494–499. Everitt, J. and Camp, M., 2014. In versus out: LGBT politicians in Canada. Journal of Canadian Studies, 48 (1), 226–251. FRA, 2014. The right to political participation for persons with disabilities: Human rights indicators. Viena: European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights. Guldvik, I., Askheim, O. P. and Johansen, V., 2013. Political citizenship and local political participation for disabled people. Citizenship Studies, 17 (1), 76–91. Haider-Markel, D. P., 2010. Out and running: Gay and lesbian candidates, elections and policy representation. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. Hughes, M., 2013. The intersection of gender and minority status in national legislatures: The minority women legislative index. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 38 (4), 489–516. Hughes, M. and Dubrow J. K., 2018. Intersectionality and women’s political empowerment worldwide. In: A. Alexander, C. Bolzendahl, F. Jalalzai, eds. Measuring women’s political empowerment across the globe. Gender and politics. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 77–96. Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2016. Youth participation in national parliaments.

­Geneva: IPU. Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2018. Women in national parliaments database, as of 1st September 2018. Geneva: IPU. Juvonen, T., 2016. Out and elected: Political careers of openly gay and lesbian politicians in Germany and Finland. Redescriptions: Political Thought, Conceptual History and Feminist Theory, 19 (1), 49–71.

126  Ana Espírito-Santo et al.

Kenny, M. and Verge, T., 2016. Opening up the black box: Gender and candidate selection in a new era. Government and Opposition, 51 (3), 351–369. Lamprinakou, C., Morucci, M., Campbell, R. and van Heerde-Hudson, J., 2017. All change in the house? The profile of candidates and MPs in the 2015 British general election. Parliamentary Affairs, 70 (2), 207–232. Mansbridge, J., 1999. Should blacks represent blacks and women represent women? A contingent “yes”. Journal of Politics, 63 (1), 628–657. Meirinho Martins, M. and Pequito Teixeira, C., 2005. O Funcionamento dos Partidos e a Participação das Mulheres na Vida Política e partidária em Portugal. Lisbon: Comissão para a Igualdade e para os Direitos das Mulheres. Monteiro, R., 2011. A Política de Quotas em Portugal: O papel dos partidos políticos e do feminismo de Estado. Revista Crítica de Ciências Sociais, 92 (March), 31–50. Morales, L., Vintila, D., Geese, L., Mügge, L., van der Pas, D. and van de Wardt, M., 2017. Codebook and data collection guidelines of work package one on descriptive political representation in national parliaments of the project Pathways to Power [online]. Leicester: University of Leicester. Available from: https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/WP1Descriptive [Accessed 1 October 2018]. Norris, P. and Lovenduski, J., 1995. Political recruitment: Gender, race and class in the British parliament. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Oliveira, C. R. and Carvalhais, I. E., 2017. Immigrants’ political claims in Portugal: Confronting the political opportunity structure with perceptions and discourses. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 40 (5), 787–808. Paxton, P. and Hughes, M., 2014. Women, politics, and power: A global perspective. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Pérez-Nievas, S., Vintila, C. D., Morales, L. and Paradés, M., 2014. La representación política de los inmigrantes en elecciones municipales. Un análisis empírico. Madrid: CIS. Phillips, A., 1998. Democracy and representation: Or, why should it matter who our representatives are?. In: A. Phillips, ed. Feminism and politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 224–240. Pitkin, Hanna F., [1967] 1972. The concept of representation. Berkeley: University of California Press. Purdie-Vaughns, V. and Eibach, R. P., 2008. Intersectional invisibility: The distinctive advantages and disadvantages of multiple subordinate-group identities. Sex Roles, 59 (5–6), 377–391. Rayside, D., 1998. On the fringe: Gays & lesbians in politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Reynolds, A., 2013. Representation and rights: The impact of LGBT legislators in comparative perspective. American Political Science Review, 107 (2), 259–274. Ruedin, D., 2009. Ethnic group representation in a cross-national comparison. The Journal of Legislative Studies, 15(4), 335–354. Ruedin, D., 2010. The relationship between levels of gender and ethnic group representation. Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism, 10 (2), 92–106. Ryan, F., 2017. Why are so few disabled candidates standing for parliament?. The Guardian [Online], 24 May. Available from: www.theguardian.com/society/2017/ may/24/few-disabled-candidates-parliament-mps [Accessed 24 March 2017]. Schwindt-Bayer, L. and Mishler, W., 2005. An integrated model of women’s representation. The Journal of Politics, 67 (2), 407–428.

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  127

Schur, L., 2003. Contending with the ‘double handicap’: Political activism among women with disabilities. Women & Politics, 25 (1/2), 31–61. Valiente, C., Ramiro, L. and Morales, L., 2004. Women in the Spanish parliament. In: Y. Galligan and M. Tremblay, eds. Sharing power: Women, parliament and democracy. Aldershot: Ashgate. Verge, T., 2012. Institutionalising gender equality in Spain: Incremental steps from party to electoral gender quotas. West European Politics, 35 (2), 395–414. Verge, T. and Espírito-Santo, A., 2016. Interactions between party and legislative quotas: Candidate selection and quota compliance in Portugal and Spain. Government and Opposition, 51 (3), 416–439. Verge, T., Novo, A., Diz, I. and Lois, M., 2017. Gender and parliament: The impact of the political presence of women. In: X. Coller, F. Mota and A. J. Castillo, eds. Political power in Spain: The multiple divides between MPs and citizens. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 43–59. Vintila, Daniela and Morales, L. 2018 “La representación política de las personas de origen inmigrante en España e Italia”, Papers, vol. 103 (4): 521–550. http://dx. doi.org/10.5565/rev/papers.2505 Wüst, A. M., 2014. A lasting impact? On the legislative activities of immigrant-­

origin parliamentarians in Germany. The Journal of Legislative Studies, 20 (4), 495–515.

Appendix

Portugal

MPs identifiable by citizens as minorities

António Costa (2002, 2015, PS) – Physical features Armando Soares (2015, PSD) – Physical features Delmar Palas (2002, PSD) – Foreign name Helder Amaral (2002, 2015, CDS) – Physical features Jorge Strecht (2002, PS) – Foreign name Narana Coissoró (2002, CDS) – Physical features and foreign name Natália Carrascalão (2002, PSD) – Physical features Nilza de Sena (2015, PSD) – Physical features Pistacchini Calhau (2002, PSD) – Foreign name Rosa Dart (2015, PSD) – Foreign name

MPs who identify themselves as minorities

Alexandre Quintanilha (2015, PS) – African identity Armando Soares (2015, PSD) – African origin Celeste Correia (2002, PS) – Cape Verde identity Helder Amaral (2002, 2015, CDS) – Identifies as black Idália Salvador Serrão (2015, PS) – Roma origin Natália Carrascalão (2002, PSD) – Timor identity

Openly gay/lesbian MPs

Alexandre Quintanilha (2015, PS) – Gay Sandra Cunha (2015, BE) – Lesbian (‘came out’ only in 2018)

Disabled MP

Jorge Falcato (2015, BE)

Diversity gap in Portuguese and Spanish parliaments  129

Spain

MPs of migrant background

Nayua Miriam Alba Goveli (2016, Ps) – Egyptian father Jaime Lissavetzky Díez (2000, PSOE) – Ukranian father Teófilo de Luis Rodríguez (2000, 2016, PP) – Cuban birth and parents Enrique Múgica Herzog (2000, PSOE) – French mother Ana María Surra Spadea (2016, ERC) – Uruguayan birth and parents Celia Villalobos Talero (2000, 2016, PP) – Argentinian father

MPs identifiable by citizens as minorities

Nayua Miriam Alba Goveli (2016, Ps) Rita Gertrudis Bosaho Gori (2016, Ps)

MPs who publicly identify themselves with an ethnic/national identity group

None (once excluded Catalan, Basque, Galician and other regional identities)

Openly gay/lesbian MPs

Antonio Hurtado Zurera (2016, PSOE) – Gay Lucía Martín González (2016, Barcelona en Comú) – Lesbian Joan Mena Arca (2016, IU) – Gay Ángela Rodríguez Martínez (2016, Ps-En Marea) – Bisexual Felipe Jesús Sicilia Alférez (2016, PSOE) – Gay María Such Palomares (2016, PSOE) – Lesbian

Disabled MP

None for 2000–2004 or 2016–2016 terms

Introduction

Parliamentary institutions are the main institutional arena of politics, and thus a core setting for MPs and interest groups to communicate their policy preferences. Simultaneously, interest groups or civic organisations aggregate citizens’ preferences and channel these into the parliamentary arena, mainly through contact with MPs. This interaction is of the utmost importance for political representation, not only because it fosters legitimacy, but also because it allows for policy responsiveness, accountability and democratic satisfaction. Following the literature (Berry 1997; Norton 1999; Jordan, Halpin, and Maloney 2004; Beyers, Eising, and Maloney 2008; Baroni et al. 2014; Gava et al. 2017), interest groups are understood as those organisations that have as primary aim to represent their members, who share a common interest or identity and that seek to influence policy decision-­ making. Moreover, they do not contest elections or assume responsibility for government. Interest groups include the so-called ‘usual suspects’ (unions, business organisations and other sectional groups), but also other types of civil society organisations (for instance, NGOs and religious groups), which attempt to influence policy to further their causes. Recent analysis on the interaction between organised interests and legislatures have highlighted the important role played by groups in terms of information for both parliamentary committees and political parties (Olson and Mezey 1991; Norton 1999; Hall and Deardorff 2006; Chalmers 2011). While parliaments may need interest groups for information, advice, cooperation and legitimacy, organised interests need institutional contacts to influence public policies and to defend their interests. In addition to information, there are also other exchanged goods such as votes or more symbolic benefits such as legitimation of policy decision-making (Bouwen 2002; Klüver 2012). Case studies have provided valuable evidence about the exchange between interest groups and other political actors (e.g. parties) or institutions, both formally and informally (e.g. through clientelist practices).1

Although legislative studies have grown in both Portugal and Spain (e.g. Liebert and Cotta 1990; Capo 2003; Leston-Bandeira 2005; Mújica and

8 Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments

Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  131

Sánchez Cuenca 2006; Palau and Muñoz Marquez 2018), there has not been a systematic comparison of the role interest groups play within legislatures. Interest groups and parliaments have been generally examined separately and little attention has been paid to this particular interaction, or it has been limited to a specific parliamentary activity such as hearings (Chaqués Bonafont and Muñoz 2016). The goal of this chapter is to examine the role of interest groups in the Iberian legislatures, paying attention particularly to how the institutional context has shaped this relationship, its evolution over the democratic period and the present debate on interest groups and transparency. The empirical analysis relies on primary and secondary sources, such as official documents, legislation and newspaper articles. We also collected and coded data on interest groups participation in parliamentary hearings. We created a unique database on interest groups hearings in both Iberian countries, following the same coding scheme and methodology to allow comparability.2 Both datasets contain information about the type of group participating in the hearing and the policy issue under discussion, as well as the parliamentary committee and the legislature. In addition, we conducted semi-structured elite interviews with MPs in Portugal and Spain, using a common questionnaire on the interactions between organised interests and parliament.3 The time span focuses on the most recent period, since 2000s onwards, although we also contextualise the historical development of organised interests during the whole democratic period. The following section will first address the institutional context framing the action of interest groups in their respective country. We concentrate in particular on parliamentary rules, the organisation of committees and the policy-making process in order to elucidate incentives and constraints for the action of interest groups. We then discuss the extent to which distinct types of interest groups mobilise and their interactions with MPs. The fourth section discusses recent trends in the participation of interest groups in the policy-making process. Finally, the conclusion summarises the main findings, highlighting the differences and similarities between the two countries and specific issues for future research.

Historical and contextual background

This section briefly outlines the main features of the Iberian legislatures and the rules that recognise the legitimacy of interest groups to interact with them. Broadly speaking, two main aspects distinguish the two parliaments in terms of the opportunities provided to groups to intervene in this institutional arena. The first is related to the semi-presidential nature of the ­Portuguese political system, establishing the direct election of the head of state, who performs an important role in appointing and dismissing the government. This is particularly important, because sometimes the president may act as a significant player voicing the preferences of specific organisations,

132  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

such as the main economic actors (Confederation of ­Portuguese Employers, banks, trade unions), institutional or cause groups. The second is the decentralised nature of the Spanish state. A gradual decentralisation of political and administrative functions affecting the whole of the state has occurred in Spain since 1977, in a process considered by some authors as of ‘federalisation’ (Moreno 2001). The creation of the Autonomous Communities has led to a major transformation of the territorial power in Spain, devolving key policy areas to the regional level. Consequently, interest groups have to interact with both national and regional levels of governance. Indeed, some interest groups have adapted their structure to the new scenario (Medina 2016). Nonetheless there are also important similarities: political parties (and parliamentary groups) are a core element of the political system in both countries in terms of political recruitment, coordination within the legislature and delimitation of executive-legislative relations. Overall, Portugal and Spain fit the party government model, whereby office holders are influenced by values and policies derived from the party and are accountable to political parties. In Spain there has also been a trend towards the formation of stable, single-party governments and the overrepresentation of large parties, while in Portugal coalition or minority governments have been more frequent. This is relevant in terms of interaction with interest groups, as during majority governments these organisations are more likely to contact government parties, whereas during minority governments they have more incentives to interact with opposition parties.4

Pasquino (1995) claimed that these new democracies are characterised by the ascendancy of the executive branch over the legislature, thus fostering decisional efficacy to the detriment of representative goals. However, it should be noted that since then the powers attributed to parliamentary committees have increased, while mass media and public opinion have boosted their capacity to act as watchdogs of politicians, political parties and representative institutions. Both countries show significant changes in the role of parliamentary committees. In Portugal, during democratic consolidation, the Chamber was considered the major actor within the legislature, with key functions in terms of decision-making, executive control and agenda setting ­(Leston-Bandeira 2002). In addition, as several studies have shown (Opello 1988; Lobo 2005), policy outputs depended mainly on the executive rather than parliament, which offered few incentives to interest groups for accessing and influencing decision-making process. Things have changed since the mid-1980s, when committees emerged as key actors in policy-making and gained significant powers. The work of committees has also become increasingly open to the public and easily scrutinised by the media, thus favouring the mobilisation of interest groups. For instance, this change was further strengthened in Portugal by the new parliamentary rules approved in 2007, which established the general rule of

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  133

publicity for parliamentary hearings (Filipe 2009). The process of European integration has also enhanced the role of committees, especially for those dealing with EU issues or institutions (Fernandes 2015). In the case of Spain, previous analyses show that the parliament has a reactive role (Capo 2003), losing its hegemonic position following the period of democratic consolidation, and becoming controlled by the government (Chaqués Bonafont, Palau, and Baumgartner 2015). However, parliament remains an interesting target for interest groups because issues can get into the parliamentary and public opinion agenda through parliamentary ­activities – particularly policy formulation and monitorisation – and more importantly because the variations in the type of government open opportunities to influence policy decision-making (Chaqués Bonafont and Muñoz 2016). Overall, the Chamber has more prominence during minority governments, with parliamentary committees becoming more important during periods of majority government (Sánchez de Dios 1999). These institutional factors are significant in order to understand interest groups’ access to influence legislation. Since 1982 the Rules of Procedure set that committees and the Chamber should meet in public. Moreover, similar to Portugal, parliament has increasingly opened up to public scrutiny thanks to the role of the media and specifically social media, giving more incentives to interest groups to raise specific issues to parliament. In addition to these legislatures’ general features, it is also important to identify the participatory rights recognised by the Constitution to the organised civil society in both countries and the specific characteristics of parliamentary functioning. Constitutional rights of association and political participation are a key mechanism to legitimise (and institutionalise) interactions with interest groups in both countries. An example of the importance of this regulatory framework is the creation in both countries of the Economic and Social Council (CES), a governmental consultative body on labour and macroeconomic issues, created in the 1980s in Spain and in 1992 in Portugal. As the relationship between employers and workers is transversal to most economic sectors, this is an area in which cooperation between government and socio-economic interests (e.g. workers’ organisations, economic activities, families, autonomic regions and local institutions) is highly formalised. In both countries, rights of participation and audience have been institutionalised over time through secondary regulation that grants a more stable status to certain groups through their participation in advisory councils. Constitutional rights also recognise interest groups’ right of petition and, importantly the principle of participation in public affairs, that expressly refers to participation by certain groups.5 In addition, both Iberian Constitutions recognise the rights of participation and consultation of trade unions and employers, as well as consumer groups, youth associations and professional associations.6

134  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

The Portuguese Constitution deserves special attention to the legacy of the 25 April Revolution, patent in Title III of the Constitution (‘Economic, social and cultural rights and obligations’), which acknowledges the positive role of a broad range of civil society associations. The most important role is attributed to trade unions and labour associations, whose participation in the decision-making process is mandatory for any matters concerning labour legislation and the elaboration of economic and social plans (art. 56). Likewise, agricultural associations are also mentioned as key players in this policy area. Overall, these constitutional provisions confirm the importance of the ‘25 April Revolution gains’ characterised by an intense mobilisation of civil society and the emergence of new social movements (Fernandes and Branco 2017).7 The Constitution’s leftist orientation is also confirmed by the fact that there are no references to employers’ organisations as collective actors. The fact that the Constitution did not recognise business associations any role in the Portuguese political system is also congruent to the overall principle of the subordination of the economic power to the political power. In both Iberian countries, the establishment of democracy meant an explosion of pluralism and the emergence of new dynamics of civil society through an increasing diversification of organised interests (e.g. Linz 1981; Branco et al. 2012). However, during the period of democratic consolidation, the interaction between interest groups and political parties in the two Iberian countries remained rather weak, concentrated in few groups and mostly based on ideological grounds and partisan alignments (Linz 1981; Morlino 1998). Institutionalised links have been established between leftist parties and trade unions, but also in this case the evidence suggests a weakening of these ties over the last decades (Barberà, Barrio, and Rodríguez-Teruel 2018; Razzuoli and Raimundo 2018). Yet, parties have targeted interest groups in order to gain political or electoral support and to strengthen their penetration into civil society (Jalali, Silva, and Silva 2012; Klüver 2012; Verge 2012). By the same token, further MP specialisation together with changing interest groups’ strategies and professionalisation in the last decades have led to a more pluralist lobbying relationship between them (Gava et al. 2017). In other words, interest groups’ lobby efforts no longer focus on government only, they also seek more direct interaction with MPs and parliamentary groups. In this respect, an important aspect seems to distinguish the two cases. Relying on the analysis of post-revolutionary politics in Portugal, Fishman (2011) argued that the legacy of the democratic transition made institutional power holders – particularly elected representatives – highly permeable to influence emanating from protest or other forms of collective action. He provided examples of informal meetings or contacts between MPs or government officials and representatives of interest groups and the broader system of civil society organisations, which have influenced the policy-making process. According to this argument, the social revolution that occurred in

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  135

Portugal was responsible for strengthening the impact the mobilisation of collective actors has on representative institutions, empowering ‘outsider’ actors and informal channels of interaction (see also Fernandes 2014).

The role of interest groups within Iberian parliaments

This section examines how the new democratic Iberian legislatures provide interest groups channels to access parliamentary institutions and opportunities to interact. In general, interest groups have three main access points to parliament: committees, parliamentary groups (as a whole) and individual MPs. The access points may be reached by using two distinct types of instruments:

1 Informal channels: the first type of group-parliament linkage is connection with MPs, which may develop through individual ties based on the deputies’ work representing their districts (or specific issues), or due to MPs’ belonging to a specific parliamentary group, thus mediating the relationship between parties and legislatures. Interest groups interact with MPs for different reasons. In particular, this interaction aims (a) to preserve contacts created during the electoral campaign and to remind MPs and parliamentary groups about their promises; (b) to monitor activities and to obtain better and clearer information about public policy; and also (c) to try to get issues into the political agenda and to have a voice in the final policy decisions through bill amendments. As parliaments are an open forum for agenda setting (Andeweg and Nijzink 1995), MPs may ally with specific groups with the aim to draw public opinion and media attention to their (common) political goals in order to shape the public agenda. 2 Formal channels. This interaction is regulated by parliamentary rules and is conducted mainly through committees; specifically, interest groups participate in hearings discussing bills or public policies. Through hearings, interest groups expose their preferences on specific matters. This participation is open in Portugal, where interest groups can ask to submit evidence in Parliament, whereas in Spain this is more closed, with access to hearings being controlled by parliamentary groups. In Portugal, MPs also devote one day (on Mondays) for contacts with their district (art. 57 of Rules of Procedures), with organised interests being particularly effective in mobilising to voice their grievances (especially territorially based issues, Interviews 2 and 3). In addition, in both countries organised interests can also present collective petitions.8

Both channels (formal and informal) can be used to provide information, for instance, through the submission of scientific reports, dossiers or other documents, as well as to convince parliamentary groups support their policy preferences. Table 8.1 summarises the means interest groups may use to

136  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

access parliaments. In the empirical analysis that follows, we focus mainly on formal instruments, while providing some examples of how informal links work on the basis of interviews. Individual contact with MPs is mainly conducted through informal channels, such as direct contact (meetings or emails) or other interactions in the context of conferences and seminars. In the words of an MP interviewed this is a ‘spontaneous way to interact, less formalised and more based in everyday life parliamentary activity’ (Interview 6). The interviews show some agreement between MPs in considering informal interactions with interest groups as a general practice. For instance, an interviewee stated that MPs receive ‘everyday emails from interest groups (teachers, trade unions, disabled people, ecologists, etc.) asking for meetings to introduce themselves, their objectives, and their point of view about a particular policy especially at the beginning of the legislature’ (Interview 8). Also, there is a general agreement that interest groups target mainly MPs specialised in their issue or who belong to a specific parliamentary committee dealing with a particular policy of their concern (Interviews 1 and 8). For instance, by convincing a parliamentary group to submit a written question, interest groups may obtain information that otherwise would be difficult to get, because government is obliged to answer parliament (Interviews 5 and 6). Moreover, oral questions proposed by interest groups to parliamentary groups are a channel to try to get an issue into the media and the political agenda (Chaqués Bonafont, Palau, and Baumgartner 2015). Looking more systematically at this interaction, we ask the extent to which some groups are more likely to get access to the legislature than others. To answer this question, we use as indicator the number of hearings in which interest groups participate, looking at the percentage by type of groups and the differences between both countries. Interest groups are invited to appear in parliamentary hearings for policy implementation or bill discussions. To complete this picture, we also analyse the policy issues discussed in those hearings to illustrate if there are differences across distinct domains in relation to the type of groups that access parliament. We also examine the importance of petitions as a second indicator of formal interactions.

Table 8.1  Channels of interaction between interest groups and parliament

Formal Informal

Meetings with MPs (Portugal) Conferences, seminars, etc. Hearings in committees Ad hoc meetings (arranged by interest groups or MPs) Petitions Interest groups reports and information delivery to MPs Interest groups’ reports and information delivery request by MPs Letters, email, workshops and external debate forums

Source: Portuguese and Spanish Parliaments. Own elaboration.

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  137

In the Portuguese Parliament we need to distinguish between two types of hearings. The first are hearings by request, which take place when one actor asks the committee to be heard on a specific matter. The second type of hearing is when MPs or parliamentary groups call specific actors to attend committee meetings. In contrast, in Spain, interest groups hearings only happen when a parliamentary committee asks them to participate. Interest groups hearings are organised by non-permanent committees and permanent committees, which may also have legislative power (Comisiones Permanentes Legislativas). Interest group appearance is mandatory only when they are requested by the so-called investigation committees (Comisión de Investigación), otherwise they can accept or reject parliament’s request to attend a hearing. Our data show that most of the hearings relate to domestic public actors, for which consultation by committees is often required by law. In the case of Portugal, this kind of linkage has remained stable in the 21st century, ranging from 68.6 per cent in the 10th legislature (2005–2009) to 66.4 per cent in the 12th legislature (2011–2015). As far as Spain is concerned, during the three legislatures analysed (2004–2015) more than 75 per cent were government members and public official hearings, while experts and interest groups account for slightly more than 20 per cent. This is plausible insofar as this is one of the main scrutiny devices used by Parliament to obtain information and to make institutional and public actors accountable to the representative body. In the same manner, very often committees must conduct mandatory hearings with institutional actors on key policies, such as local administration, privatisations or other major reforms. In examining the different types of interest groups in Spain, NGOs are the main category (between 40 and 60 per cent of all groups), followed by business and professional associations. The high percentage for NGOs in Spain – substantially higher than in Portugal, see below – responds, to a great extent, to the politicisation of rights issues during the first and second legislatures of the socialist Zapatero (2004–2011), in which different bills on women’s rights and same sex marriage were discussed. NGOs were also invited to discuss the elderly protection and care bill. However, these figures are not due just to the socialist policy preferences, as during the Rajoy first legislature (2011–2015), NGOs are also the main category. This is not completely surprising as other European cases show the same trend (Binderkrantz, Christiansen, and Pedersen 2015). Overall, Spain is approaching a more pluralist model in the parliamentary arena, in line with other European countries such as Belgium or Switzerland (Binderkrantz, Christiansen, and Pedersen 2015; Gava et al. 2017). In particular, while there is a growing number of interest groups in the welfare domain – such as health, education and social policy – a neo-corporatist model seems to consolidate in economic and labour issues, in which the usual suspects (unions and business organisations) are the most common participants. According to similar data collected for the Portuguese case, during the 2005–2009 period trade unions displayed the highest proportion of

138  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

appearances in hearings (39.1 per cent), but then the percentage declined to roughly 23 per cent. Business organisations have shown an opposite trend, ranging from 8.9 per cent (between 2005 and 2009) to 34.1 (between 2011 and 2015). NGOs are equally important and feature a relevant proportion of hearings (between 36.1 and 47.4 per cent). Finally, the visibility of professional organisations seems to have declined during the period analysed, falling from 14.9 to 6.3 per cent. If we analyse in more detail the type of issues addressed, in Portugal the committees with more hearings are Finance, Education, Constitutional matters, Economy and Labour, accounting for more than 50 per cent of the total number (Table 8.2). These results may be associated to the relative strong mobilisation power of the main trade unions (CGTP and UGT) and their links with political allies (i.e. leftist parties).9 In Spain the committees of social issues are also the ones that have more hearings with interest groups (Education and Culture, Health and Social Policy, see percentages in Table 8.3). In addition, the two countries also display similar figures in terms economic issues, which amount, on average, to approximately one fifth of the total number of hearings. However, important differences emerge with regard to European matters, both parliaments have a relevant EU affairs committee, but in the case of Spain their number of hearings is very low and no interest groups participated

Table 8.2  Interest groups participation in parliamentary hearings, Portugal (2005–2015)

10th (2005–2009) % 11th (2009–2011) % 12th (2011–2015) %

Constitutional matters, rights and liberties 17.2 10.4 9.0

Foreign affairs 4.3 5.8 3.1 Defence 6.5 3.6 4.8 European affairs 6.1 5.9 5.5 Budget and Finance 15 12.2 19.8 Economy, innovation and energy 8.1 7.6 10.4

Agriculture, rural development and fishing – 5.6 8.4

Education and Science 10.1 14 13 Public Works, transportations and communication 5.5 5.5 –

Health 6.7 7.1 5.6 Labour, social security and public administration 11.8 6.2 7.2

Environment, regional development and local power 4.1 4.3 7.5

Ethics, society and culture 4.5 11.9 5.7 (Total number) (851) (697) (1,468) (Average per session) (212.8) (348.5) (367)

Source: Parliamentary data.

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  139

during the period analysed. The same happens for justice in the Spanish Parliament. Finally, in both countries, interest groups are almost never heard in the Defence or the Foreign Affairs and Foreign Aid Committees. There are also important differences over time worthy of examination. In both countries, the Constitutional, Rights and Liberties Committee held an important number of hearings during the first legislature under analysis, but it shows a significant decline in the following period (see Tables 8.2 and 8.3). The same pattern can be seen in the agriculture and environment areas in Spain. In contrast, in both Iberian countries the number of hearings in the industry, trade and tourism shows a significant increase over time, as well as for budget and financial issues. The policy issues in which interest groups are involved depend greatly on the politicisation of the legislative agenda. MPs’ interviews highlight the important mobilisation of interest groups on issues such as energy and civil construction when they are discussed in parliament. There are also other issues that are highly politicised such as agriculture, fishing, patient rights and, particularly in Spain, other issues such as terrorism or accident victims in which the government is made responsible. Professional associations are also highly mobilised to defend the position of their profession, like the Engineer’s professional associations (Interview 4). On the other hand, it is interesting to note that in both cases there has been stability in the overall number of hearings over the last legislatures. This means that the crisis did not alter the intensity of interactions between interest groups and committees, which can also be considered as an indicator of the stabilisation of parliamentary activities. Yet, it should be noted that in Portugal the average number of hearings reached a peak

Table 8.3  Interest groups participation in parliamentary hearings, Spain (2005–2015)

8th (2004–2008) % 9th (2008–2011) % 10th (2011–2015) %

Constitutional, Rights and Liberties 16.2 15.3 4.2

Agriculture and Environment 12.2 10.0 7.9 Foreign Affairs and Foreign Aid 0.8 5.8 1.9

Education and Culture 20.6 12.9 9.9 Defence 0 2.9 2.6 Economy and Finance 5.4 5.0 9.5 Industry, Trade and Tourism 7.9 20.9 23.0 Crime and Justice 4.0 14.2 8.0 Health and Social Policy 32.1 12.2 32.3 European Affairs 0.8 0.7 0.7 (Total number) (598) (479) (535) (Average per session) (149.5) (159.7) (133.8)

Source: Parliamentary data and Q-Dem research group database on interest groups hearings in the Spanish Parliament.

140  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

during the crisis, but it is still too early to assess whether this was a conjunctural increase or the beginning of a more long-term trend. It is plausible also to expect that interest groups mobilise more when a new political cycle begins, that is, when the majority shifts from one party (or ideological block) to another. However, our results do not confirm this expectation, as there is relative stability over each legislative term with regard to the frequency of meetings.10 Another way to read these tables is in terms of the majority and minority governments dynamics. In the case of Spain, we can see that the number of hearings is stable during the Zapatero minority government legislatures (2004–2008 and 2008–2011), while there is an important decrease (almost 25 per cent) during the first Rajoy’ government (2011–2015), a majority one. As Chaqués Bonafont and Muñoz (2016) have argued, majority governments and their parliamentary groups do not provide incentives to discuss bills or promote policy evaluation through hearings. Unless the policy issue generates strong confrontation then interest groups will be invited to enhance decision-making legitimation. Finally, another common instrument that interest groups may use for interacting with parliaments in both countries is the use of petitions. According to recent data on the Portuguese case (Tibúrcio 2018), the overall number of petitions has significantly increased, especially since 2005 when a major reform allowed campaigners to submit e-petitions. However, this increase was due mainly to the explosion of individual petitions, which represent since 2000s, on average, more than 60 per cent of the petitions submitted to parliament (Tibúrcio 2018). Empirical studies have also shown that collective petitions present a narrower range of issues than individual petitions, focusing mostly on health and transportation (Tibúrcio 2015, 2018). On the other hand, trade unions seem to be the most active actor in terms of submissions, although their role has decreased over time, probably as a side-effect of their difficulties to mobilise civil society and the declining numbers of their membership. Citizen groups have also played a key role in using this tool to voice their preferences, submitting an increasing number of petitions over the last decades. Other important actors are professional associations, which also register a positive trend, especially during the crisis period (2009–2015). More importantly, Tibúrcio (2018) shows that collective actors are relatively successful in discussing their concerns in the Chamber, with their petitions being discussed in plenary sessions more often than those presented by individuals. In Spain, citizens and interest groups are also able to present petitions to parliament. Petitions (consultas) are channelled through the Petitions Committee (Comisión de Peticiones), which is in charge to coordinate replies to petitions between government and parliament. As in Portugal, most petitions are promoted by individuals, which means that this is not a privileged channel for interest groups that have many other instruments to interact and to trespass their worries to public policy actors.

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  141

Transparency and regulation of interest groups interaction with parliament

Interest groups make representations to policy-makers – what we usually call lobbying – in different ways, for example, by taking protest actions, disseminating studies, media releases or seeking more direct contacts with politicians. According to our interviews, informal contacts play an important role in shaping the relationship between MPs and organised interests, aiming at influencing the political agenda, party positions on specific issues, governments’ action or parliaments’ decisions. Portugal and Spain are also no exception to the general trend of increasing citizens’ mistrust in governments, growing disaffection and rising feelings of anger towards politicians. Moreover, political scandals and wrongdoings that emerged during the Great Recession have fuelled the crisis of political representation. In reaction to this turbulent scenario, attempts to recover the relationship between citizens and parliaments have involved two types of responses, namely through (1) the introduction of new mechanisms of citizen participation in policy-making and (2) the adoption of transparency measures and (the debate on) the regulation of MPs-group interactions. Complementing the above findings, this section explores recent trends through which interest groups intervene in the policy-making process. Portugal has seen an expansion of opportunities provided to groups to influence policy outcomes. For example, the program ‘Legislate Better’ (­Government resolution nº63/2006), approved in 2006, expanded consultation meetings and established a new (broader) system of negotiation between parliament and civil society. It also recognised the role of public consultations. On the other hand, the growing use of digital tools has stimulated the fragmentation of interest representation, especially for the policy-­making process (Interviews 1 and 3). The efficacy of these practices, however, seems to be rather weak. Indeed, empirical evidence regarding the policy-­making process shows that these exchanges are not integrated in the final reports elaborated by parliamentary committees and that the information is rarely transmitted to other institutions (Caupers, Tavares de Almeida, and Guibentif 2014). Most interest groups in Portugal do not have professional staff dedicated to supporting relationships with MPs or other office holders; instead, they rely on external services, especially by hiring public relation agencies to represent their interests (see TIAC 2017). These actors employ different means to influence policy-making. One of these means is based on parliamentary hearings, but informal contacts are also important. According to a recent study, the areas where interest groups mobilise more frequently to influence parliamentary work are the financial sector, energy, civil construction, Church and pharmaceutical industry (Coroado 2017). As seen above, informal channels of interaction are also constant in Spain and linked to everyday parliamentary activities. Nonetheless, the

142  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

general impression of MPs is that interest groups interact directly with them and they have less contact with consultancies and professional lobbies, though professional lobbies are advisors of some interest groups. For instance, MPs mentioned that some of proposals of amendments from business groups are written by lawyer firms or other consultancies (Interview 5). NGOs are naturally those groups perceived by MPs as those with fewer resources to hire professional staff or professional lobby’s services. But this is not always the case, as the national organisation of blind people (Organización Nacional de Ciegos de España, ONCE) in Spain shows, being one of the actors with the highest record of mobilisation in the parliamentary arena. In both countries, there is also evidence that ‘dark lobbying’ is an important tool interest groups employ to influence the policy-making process. This phenomenon takes place through informal contacts between MPs and group representatives. Deputies are not obliged to make their agenda public; thus they can easily meet with interest groups. As there is no practice of ‘legislative footprint’, it is difficult to evaluate the extent to which interest groups are successful in shaping legislative outcomes. But parties’ weak roots within civil society, and the widespread legitimacy deficit of representative actors and public institutions, certainly make the establishment of informal contacts more appealing, increasing the lack of transparency of interest group actions. There are no laws or regulations sanctioning the intervention of interest groups in the policy-making process and the interaction with MPs in both countries. In Portugal, the problem of transparency and lobbying was first discussed during the right-wing government led by Passos Coelho (2011– 2015), when the secretary of state Pedro Lomba made the first attempt to regulate the institutional activities of interest groups representatives. The proposal aimed to create a mandatory register and a code of conduct for interest groups, but this was to be applied only to the government and public institutes, thus excluding parliament. However, resistance from some parliamentary groups and MPs, together with looming general elections, led to the failure of the government’s initiative. By the same token, transparency and interest groups regulation have been a central topic of political debate in Spain. However, the absence of consensus among parliamentary groups and the government on the type of activities that must be reported by MPs and interest groups, has hampered a final decision. Political scandals and the economic crisis boosted a transparency law approved in 2013 by Rajoy’s majority government, but its impact is still very modest in institutional and social terms. Autonomous Communities have gone a step forward in regulating interest groups, especially in Catalonia where the transparency law approved in 2014 established the creation of an interest group register following the European Union model. The register was created in 2015, including local

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  143

and regional administrations. Moreover, the Catalan Parliament regulated interest groups by establishing a register, but this has not yet been completely implemented. The aftermath of the economic and financial crisis and the emergence of corruption scandals in the political arena strengthened the importance of regulating lobbying. As mentioned before, interest groups interact on a regular basis with representatives and the participatory principle is recognised in both constitutions, paving the way for the establishment of (more or less) stable and institutionalised interactions through formal channels. Yet the debate is about the importance to regulate also lobbying activities and interactions that go beyond this principle. In Spain, several political scandals such as the Barcenas case, which involved the People’s Party (PP, Partido Popular) was one of the most publicised by the media. But this case and other scandals, which also involve the socialist party, are just the top of the iceberg. A similar trajectory emerged in Portugal. Following a scandal with the involvement of government members of the socialist government led by Costa (2015–2019), the executive decided to establish some ethical rules to prevent wrongdoings of public office holders. This code is an ‘auto-regulatory instrument’, which binds the members of the 13th constitutional government only and establishes some general principles (e.g. transparency, integrity, honesty), which should guide governing officials’ action. Moreover, it sets out limits for the reception of bids.11

The Portuguese Parliament has recently discussed the opportunity to adopt a register for interest groups, following international standards. One of the main problems discussed during the debate in the 13th legislature (2015–2019) is the establishment of a stricter regime of incompatibilities and a transparency register for public office holders. The proposals advocated by the CDS (Centro Democrático e Social, Social Democratic Centre) and PS (Partido Socialista, Socialist Party) were based on the creation of a lobby register, which should be public, free and facultative, with no sanctions for those not registered in the list. There seems to be a consensus with regard to the need to include in the register not only MPs, but also local and national office holders, candidates to the Presidency of the Republic, as well as consultants and state representatives in privatisation processes. However, both the Portuguese Communist Party (PCP, Partido Comunista Português) and the BE (Left Bloc, Bloco de Esquerda) have remained sceptical regarding the capacity to create a new register and sanction lobbying practices.12 One of the main weaknesses of the reform is that the oversight of incompatibilities and of conflict of interests seems to be ineffective. From this point of view, the BE defends the exclusivity for MPs, as well as the creation of a new body (Entidade de Transparência dos Titulares de Cargos Políticos e Altos Cargos Públicos) with the aim of strengthening transparency and the compliance to rules, while the other parties simply want to transfer these powers to the Constitutional Court.

144  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

Conclusions

This chapter provides a first preliminary overview of the evolution and present characteristics of the relationship between parliaments and interest groups in Portugal and Spain, which have displayed significant similarities in terms of party system features and the functioning of political system. We now highlight the main findings. First, in both countries the institutionalised channels of contact are mainly based around parliamentary committees. However, informal contacts have also played a very important role in fostering contacts between interest groups and parliaments. This is clear especially when we observe the relationship between individual MPs and organised interests, as well as the role of intermediation that representatives (especially lawyers) play between groups, PR agencies and political powers. Finally, informal contacts also emerge when we consider information exchange and email communications, as well as interaction between parliamentary groups and organised interests to set the media and public opinion agenda – for instance, through conferences, workshop, etc. – or parliamentary activities (e.g. oral questions). Another important finding relates to the type of interest groups most likely to mobilise in the two parliamentary arenas, with interesting differences between the two legislatures. While in Spain NGOs are, in terms of hearings, those participating the most in the parliamentary arena, reinforcing the pluralist configuration of the system of interest intermediation, in Portugal more institutionalised groups and with more resources are the most effective in mobilising. This difference depends, to a large extent, on the distinct institutional framework of either country (e.g. decentralisation, party system) and on the legacy of democratisation on the mobilisation of organised civil society. Another relevant finding is that in both countries the connection between interest groups and MPs is poorly regulated, although there is an ongoing debate on how to ensure more transparency and accountability. From this viewpoint, it is also worth noting the importance of new digital devices to foster transparency and to facilitate channels of interest representation. For instance, the introduction of e-petitions was decisive in strengthening the role of civil society in the mobilisation of their demands. Last but not least, this chapter shows that the crisis has had a limited impact on the modalities of interaction between parliaments and interest groups. This can be interpreted as a result of the institutionalisation of the Iberian parliaments and the fact that most interest groups have tried to access more directly governments and party leaders rather than parliamentary actors. One limitation of our analysis is the focus on the national level of ­parliament- group relations, although we acknowledge that multi-level ­politics ­favour a diversification of the channels interest groups utilise to influence ­policy- making, namely through the European and local arenas. Certainly, more research is needed on the relationship between parliaments and interest groups in Portugal and Spain. It will require more empirical studies on MPs’ behaviour, the legislative process and the influence of interest groups on agenda setting. Implementing this research agenda from a comparative perspective

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  145

might improve our knowledge on the interplay of two key actors in the functioning of contemporary political systems.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by national funds through the FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia within the framework of the research project ‘From Representation to Legitimacy: Political Parties and Interest Groups in Southern Europe’ (PTDC/IVC­-CPO/1864/2014). We also acknowledge the funding of the Ministerio de Economía y Ciencia de España within the framework of the research project “La política de transparencia y derecho a la información en un contexto de gobernanza multinivel” (CSO-2015-69878-P).

Notes

­February and July 2018. The questionnaire covered several dimensions, such as party-group relations, strategies of interest groups’ mobilisation in the parliament, or the role of organised interests in the policy-making process. The interviews were granted under the condition of anonymity (see Appendix). 4 One interviewee highlighted that the result of these activities may also vary

­according to the type of government, since it is very difficult for a group to successfully influence the action of majority government through parliamentary channels (Interview 1). 5 For Portugal, see art. 37 and 52 of the Portuguese Constitution. For Spain, see art. 23 and art. 9.2. 6 See art. 56 and 60 of the Portuguese Constitution and art. 51.2 and 48 of the Spanish Constitution. 7 It is also worth noting the mention in the Constitution (art. 77–79) that teachers’, cultural and sport associations should complement the State in order to formulate policies in their respective areas. 8 In Portugal this provision excludes the possibility of associative movements without a legal recognition to present a petition, with the exception of neighbourhood associations in relation to local authorities. 9 In Portugal, data on parliamentary hearings also include institutional groups and corporations. 10 This pattern remains true even when we consider hearings by request. 11 See resolution nº 53/2016, Diário da República, 1ª nº182, 21 September 2016. 12 See, for instance, Público 23 June 2017.

References

Andeweg, R. and Nijzink, L (1995). “Beyond the Two-Body Image: Relations between Ministers and MPs.” In Döring, H. (ed) Parliaments and Majority Rule in Western Europe, Frankfurt am Main: St Martin’s Press, 152–178. Barberà, O., Barrio, A. and Rodríguez-Teruel, J. (2018). “New Parties’ Linkages with External Groups and Civil Society in Spain: A Preliminary Assessment.” Mediterranean Politics. doi:10.1080/13629395.2018.1428146.

146  Marco Lisi and Luz Muñoz Marquez

Baroni, L., Carroll, B. Chalmers, A., Muñoz Marquez, L. and Rasmussen. A. (2014). “Defining and Classifying Interest Groups.” Interest Groups & Advocacy 3(2), 141–159. doi:10.1057/iga.2014.9. Berry, J. (1997). The Interest Group Society. London: Longman. Beyers, J, Eising, R. and Maloney. W. (2008). “Researching Interest Group Politics in Europe and Elsewhere: Much We Study, Little We Know?” West European Politics 31(6), 1103–1128. doi:10.1080/01402380802370443. Binderkrantz, A., Munk Christiansen, P. and Helboe Pedersen, H. (2015). “Interest Group Access to the Bureaucracy, Parliament, and the Media.” Governance 28(1), 95–112. Bouwen, P. (2002). “Corporate Lobbying in the European Union: The Logic of Access.” Journal of European Public Policy 9(3), 365–390. Branco, R., Fernandes, T., Cancela, J. and Dias Coelho, T. (2012). “Démocratisation et société civile. leçons de l’expérience portugaise.” Pôle Sud 37(2), 9–23. Caupers, J., Tavares de Almeida, M. and Guibentif, P. (2014). Feitura Das Leis: Portugal e a Europa. Lisbon: Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos. Capo, J. (2003). “The Spanish Parliament in a Triangular Relationship, 1982–2000.” The Journal of Legislative Studies 9(2), 107–129. Chalmers, A. (2011). “Interests, Influence and Information: Comparing the Influence of Interest Groups in the European Union.” Journal of European Integration 33(4), 471–486. Chaqués Bonafont, L. and Muñoz Marquez, L. (2016). “Explaining Interest Groups Access to Parliamentary Committees.” West European Politics 39(6), 1276–1298. Chaqués Bonafont, L., Palau, A. and Baumgartner, F. (2015). Policy Dynamics in Spain. London: Palgrave. Coroado, S. (2017). O Grande Lóbi. Lisbon: Objectiva. Fernandes, J. (2015). O Parlamento Português. Lisbon: Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos. Fernandes, T. (2014). A Sociedade Civil. Lisbon: Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos. Fernandes, T. and Branco. R. (2017). “Long-Term Effects: Social Revolution and Civil Society in Portugal, 1974–2010.” Comparative Politics 49(3), 411–431. Filipe, A. (2009). “The 2007 Reform of the Portuguese Parliament: What Has Really Changed?” The Journal of Legislative Studies 15(1), 1–9. Fishman, R. M. (2011). “Democratic Practice after the Revolution: The Case of Portugal and Beyond.” Politics and Society 39(2), 233–267. Gava, R., Varone, F., Mach, A., Eichenberger, S., Christe, J. and Chao‐Blanco, C. (2017). “Interests Groups in Parliament: Exploring MPs’ Interest Affiliations (2000–2011).” Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft 23(1), 77–94. Grant, W. (1989). Pressure Groups, Politics and Democracy in Britain. New York: Philip Allan. Hall, R. L. and Deardorff, A. (2006). “Lobbying as Legislative Subsidy.” American Political Science Review 100(1), 69–84. Jalali, C., Silva, P. and Silva, S. (2012). “Givers and Takers: Parties, State Resources and Civil Society in Portugal.” Party Politics 18(1), 61–80. Jordan, G., Halpin, D. and Maloney, W. (2004) “Defining Interests: Disambiguation and the Need for New Distinctions?” The British Journal of Politics & International Relations 6(2), 195–212. Klüver, H. (2012). “Informational Lobbying in the European Union: The Effect of Organizational Characteristics.” West European Politics 35(3), 491–510.

Interest groups in the Iberian parliaments  147

La Palombara, J. (1964). Interest Groups in Italian Politics. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2002). Da Legislação à Legitimação: O Papel do Parlamento Português. Lisbon: Instituto de Ciências Sociais. Leston-Bandeira, C. (ed) (2005). Southern European Parliaments in Democracy. London: Routledge. Liebert, U. and Cotta, M. (eds) (1990). Parliaments and Democratic Consolidation in Southern Europe: Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and Turkey. London: Pinter. Linz, J. (1981). “A Century of Politics and Interests in Spain.” In Berger, S. (ed) Organizing Interests in Western Europe: Pluralism, Corporatism, and the Transformation of Politics, New York: Cambridge University Press, 367–416. Lobo, M. C. (2005). Governar Em Democracia. Lisbon: ICS. Medina, I. (2016). “Are Business Associations Involved in Regional Politics? Evidence from Spain and the United Kingdom.” European Urban and Regional Studies 23(3), 389–405. Moreno, L. (2001). The Federalization of Spain. London: Frank Cass. Morlino, L. (1998). Democracy between Consolidation and Crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Mújica, A. and Sánchez-Cuenca, I. (2006). “Consensus and Parliamentary Opposition: The Case of Spain.” Government and Opposition 41(1), 86–108. Norton, P. (ed) (1999). Parliaments and Pressure Groups. London: Frank Cass. Olson, D. and Mezey, M. (1991). “Parliaments and Public Policy.” In Olson, D. and Mezey, M. (eds) Legislatures in the Policy Process: The Dilemmas of Economic Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–23. Opello, W. (1988). “O Parlamento Português: Análise Organizacional da Actividade Legislativa.” Análise Social XXIV(100), 127–150. Palau, A. and Muñoz Marquez, L. (2018). “Spain: Government and Opposition in a Multilevel Context.” In Di Giorgi, E. and Ilonszki, G. (eds) Opposition Parties in European Legislatures. Responsiveness without Responsibility? London: Routledge. Pasquino, G. (1995). “Executive-Legislative Relations in Southern Europe.” In Gunther, R., Diamandouros, N. and Puhle, H.-J. (eds) The Politics of Democratic Consolidation, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University, 261–283. Razzuoli, I. and Raimundo, F. (2018). “Party-Interest Group Relations in Portugal. Organizational Linkages and Party Strategies (2008–2015).” Mediterranean Politics. doi:10.1080/13629395.2018.1428152. Sánchez de Dios, M. (1999). “Parliamentary Party Discipline in Spain.” In Bowler, S., Farrel, D. and Katz, R. (eds) Party Discipline and Parliamentary Government, Columbus: Ohio University Press, 141–162. TIAC. 2017. Lóbi a descoberto. O Mercado de influências em Portugal. Lisbon: TIAC. Tibúrcio, T. 2015. “O Parlamento e os Cidadãos em Portugal: O Direito de Petição Antes e Depois da Troika, à Luz de Critérios de Eficácia.” In Freire, A., Lisi, M. and Leite Viegas, J. M. (eds) Representação e Participação Política na Europa em Crise, Lisbon: Assembleia da República, 235–255. Tibúrcio, T. (2018). “A Eficácia dos Sistemas de Petições na Europa: O Impacto da Modernização do Caso Português, em Particular.” Unpublished PhD Dissertation. Lisbon: ISCTE-IUL. Available at https://repositorio.iscte- iul.pt/ handle/10071/14139. Verge, T. (2012). “Party Strategies towards Civil Society in New Democracies: The Spanish Case.” Party Politics 18(1), 45–60.

AU: Please provide the page range for references “Palau and Muñoz Marquez (2018)”.

List of interviews

Interview 1: MP of the Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), Lisbon, 23rd July 2018. Interview 2: MP of the Portuguese Socialist Party (PS), Lisbon, 8th ­February 2018. Interview 3: MP of the Social Democratic Party (PSD), Lisbon, 30th April 2018. Interview 4: MP of the Spanish Socialist Party (PSOE), Madrid, 8th March 2018. Interview 5: MP of the United Left (IU), Barcelona, 26th March 2018. Interview 6: MP of the Republic Left of Catalonia (ERC), Barcelona, 3rd April 2018. Interview 7: MP of the People Party (PP), Madrid, 12th April 2018. Interview 8: MP of the People Party (PP), Madrid, 12th April 2018.

Appendix

Introduction

Parliaments are a pivotal building block of political systems in representative democracies. Indeed, they embody formal and popular political legitimacy. The constellation of functions of parliaments speaks to their importance. Members of parliament (MPs) are in charge of legislating, electing and toppling governments, and to carry out an array of activities on behalf of their constituents. Such perspective of representation confers a great deal of importance to the study of public opinion towards parliaments and their members. In representative democracies – both in the “mandate” and “accountability” declinations (Przeworski et al. 1999; Mansbridge 2003) – the trust of citizenry on their representatives is vital. To be sure, in the mandate view, voters select MPs based on their electoral pledges, even if they do not have the capacity to keep tabs on all their actions. In the “accountability” view, citizens make a retrospective appraisal of MPs’ performance wherein they reward or punish their representatives based on the extent to which they delivered benefits aligned with voters’ preferences. By and large, the higher the degree of citizenry information about the policy-making deliberations of their representatives, the more that will reflect on retrospective voting. However, in contexts in which most citizens are ill informed, uncertainty about the results of policies increases, and the reputation of politicians decreases, trust becomes all the more important (Bianco 1994). The level of trust will affect how they vote, and whether they have to offer ex post explanations (Bianco 1994). Similar considerations could be extended to other attitudes of citizens towards the Parliament. Building on Easton’s work, support attitudes towards institutions can be classified into diffuse and specific (1965, 1975). Diffuse attitudes are more generic, more stable and less responsive to short-term contextual factors. On the contrary, specific support is more dependent on concrete results and activities – that is, it will depend on the context and, also, on the extent to which the institution’s performance is assessed positively.

9 Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation

José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

150  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

In addition to Easton’s work, we adopt other frameworks in this analysis of public opinion, namely one that helps us to understand what makes representative democracy more legitimate in the eyes of citizens than other political decision-making methods. According to Eulau and colleagues, the fundamental question for the theories of representation is not just the fact that decision-makers are elected, but that “what representatives decide and the way they reach decisions is more nearly in accord with expectations and demands of the represented” than another system (1959: 743). One of the aspects that affects this perception of legitimacy is the idea of “role” (idem). Referring to Burke’s distinction between focus and style of representation, Eulau and his colleagues reminded us that there are different “foci” of representation. That is, different ways to delimit the interests that MPs should represent (i.e. local vs. national). According to Burke, the foci would be associated with a certain “style” of representation (i.e. MPs should trust their own criteria when deliberating and legislating, or those of certain groups). Even though this association between “foci” and “style” has been questioned (Eulau et al. 1959: 746), it is still relevant to find out what citizens think about the foci and the styles that the MPs should represent. Two other aspects contribute to this as well: the opinions about who should select the parliamentary candidates (Gallagher and Marsh 1988), and citizens views about the mechanism by which seats are assigned to the elected candidates, that is, the electoral system. In this chapter, we aim at providing a general overview of Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards their parliamentary institutions, taking both a comparative and longitudinal perspective. Our goal is to understand to what extent citizens support the representative institution par excellence, consider it to be a trustworthy institution and are satisfied with its performance, as well as how they understand and assess the parliamentary focus and style of representation, the candidate selection procedures and the electoral system used to elect MPs. By and large, these topics have been overlooked in the field of legislative studies. Moreover, they have been a secondary concern of public opinion scholars in Portugal and Spain, which means that both the literature and data are scarce. Some studies have paid attention to trust in parliament,1 either as a feature of broader political trust (e.g. Magalhães 2002, 2003; Teixeira and Freire 2010; Torcal 2014; Jaime-Castillo et al. 2016; Muro and Vidal 2016), or on its own (Montero 1989; Martínez and Crespo 1998; ­Méndez-Lago and Martínez 2002; Méndez-Lago 2006; Oñate 2003; Freire and Meirinho 2012; Mota 2016; López-Nieto 2017). We argue that there are several reasons to pay special attention to the public opinion regarding the parliament in Portugal and Spain. First, these are fairly recent third-wave democracies where there may be traces of antiparliamentarism in the population, due to the historical developments of the early and mid-20th century, exemplified by the bad reputation of MPs and parties (Montero 1989; Magalhães 2002; Torcal et al. 2002).

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  151

Second, recent developments, namely the political consequences of the great recession (Bosco and Verney 2012, 2017), exponentiates the usefulness of understanding the longitudinal dynamics in terms of how citizens look at the institution that formally represents the different viewpoints in their societies, and whose sovereignty has been questioned in the context of the crisis by the imposition of measures by the EU. Finally, the frequency of minority governments with the parliamentary support of other parties in both countries also makes the study of these two countries especially interesting (Field 2016). The importance of the parliamentary arena has increased in the current context, where the number of seats of the ruling party in both countries is smaller than ever. In methodological terms, the focus on these two polities allows us to introduce a most similar systems framework to the analysis, in terms of political culture. This does not obviate the institutional arrangements put into practice after the transition into democracy, that mirror the diversity of Spain and homogeneity of Portugal, as explained in another chapter of this book. This chapter is organized in five sections. After this introduction, we discuss the available public opinion data and previous research on diffuse and specific attitudes towards the legislative institutions in the Iberian Peninsula: importance, interest and knowledge, trust and satisfaction with its performance. The second section deals with the perceptions and preferences in terms of focus and style of representation offered by the Portuguese and Spanish parliaments. Finally, we explore views and preferences regarding candidate selection and electoral system. The chapter concludes with a summary and discussion of the main findings.

Diffuse support: the importance of parliamentary institutions

The perception of parliaments as relevant political institutions seems to be particularly widespread in the two Iberian democracies. Between the early 1980s and the year 2000, four in every five Spanish citizens agreed that the parliament was important for the functioning of democracy and a necessary institution, while almost two-thirds believed that parliamentary activities had a great or considerable impact on their lives (Oñate 2003). Over the two decades, these attitudes have been slightly more modest but still very high: approximately 75 per cent2 of Spaniards considered the parliament important and 57 per cent believed that the Congress had a great or substantial impact in their lives (CIS 2003, 2008). However, the lower chamber is placed in the last position in terms of impact amongst the main political institutions, after the city council (73 per cent), the regional (66 per cent) and the national government (66 per cent) (CIS 2005). This pattern of modest decrease in the perceived relevance of the Spanish parliament can be linked to the relative loss of centrality it has suffered due to the European integration and the political decentralization of the State, both resulting in a loss of powers to supranational or subnational entities (Méndez-Lago and Martínez 2002).

152  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

Figures for the Portuguese are similar, with 63 per cent of the citizens considering the parliament essential to the Portuguese political system in 2002 (Freire et al. 2003). The data collected by Bacalhau (1994), in 1984 and 1993, already showed the existence of majorities of citizens convinced of the parliament’s relevance (64 and 80 per cent, respectively). Also, in the mid-2000s, the Assembleia da República was seen by almost one-third of the population as the political institution that actually ruled the country, second to the prime minister (51 per cent) and before the Council of ­Ministers (25 per cent) and the President of the Republic (14 per cent) (Freire et al. 2006).

Interest in, and knowledge of, parliament

In 2005, only one-third claimed to be interested in parliamentary activities, while the interest in the activities of local and regional authorities and the national government was considerably higher, with percentages ranging from 45 to 54 per cent (CIS 2005). Lack of interest in parliamentary debates has been predominant in the Spanish society between 1982 and 2000 (Montero 1989; Oñate 2003). Spanish citizens seem to possess lower levels of information about the parliament than the Portuguese. In Spain, just around one-third of the citizens recalls the name of the president of the Congress of Deputies and less than 10 per cent that of the Senate’s president (Oñate2003). In Portugal, in 2008, only 11 per cent of the citizens claimed that they never heard of Jaime Gama, then president of the Assembleia da República (Freire and Viegas 2009).

Trust in parliament

Political trust has benefited from a flourishing body of scholarly work over the last decade. Such trend coincided with increasing concerns amongst political scientists, politicians, stakeholders and citizens at large about the erosion of trust of Iberian citizens on their political institutions. Figure 9.1 illustrates that, since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, trust in the national parliament has declined in both countries. In the early 2000s, about half of the Iberian citizens tended to trust their national parliament, in line with the EU average. These figures were slightly higher than those observed in Portugal and Spain in the 1980s and 1990s – all ranging from 35 to 40 per cent (Teixeira and Freire 2010). Some authors stress that the decrease in political trust predates the financial crisis (Muro and Vidal 2016). However, it seems undeniable that the political and economic woes of Iberian countries in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis functioned as a death blow to trust in parliament. To be sure, in 2013 only 12.5 per cent of the Portuguese and 6.8 per cent of the Spaniards expressed such positive attitude. In fact, parliaments have not been the only institutions affected by declining trust levels. Political parties, national

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  153

governments and, particularly, the European Union have witnessed a decline in trust. The two Iberian countries were indeed among the countries with the largest decrease in institutional trust in Europe between 2008 and 2012 (Torcal 2014). Since 2015, there have been signs of recovery, although much clearer in Portugal, as a possible reaction to the political and economic events in the country (cf. De Giorgi and Santana Pereira 2016). By the end of 2017, trust in the Assembleia da República was again above the levels in the EU at large. In Spain, the recovery is still quite timid, and it is still clearly lagging behind the EU at large. These oscillations confirm that, besides being related to diffuse support, political trust is related to specific support depending on the evaluation of performance (Hetherington 1998). What factors account for variation in citizens’ trust in parliamentary institutions? Existing literature suggests different answers. For one, some emphasize cultural factors and stress the relevance of social capital and values as explaining factors (cf. Mishler and Rose 2001). Other authors point out the support for the incumbent as the single most important determinant of trust in parliament (Holmberg et al. 2017). Finally, some authors focus on political and economic performance (Mishler and Rose 2001).

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

Trust in the national parliament (%)

13/10/2001

29/03/2002

01/10/2003

02/10/2004

09/05/2005

27/03/2006

06/09/2006

10/04/2007

22/09/2007

25/03/2008

06/10/2008

12/06/2009

23/10/2009

05/05/2010

06/05/2011

05/11/2011

12/05/2012

03/11/2012

10/05/2013

02/11/2013

31/05/2014

08/11/2014

16/05/2015

07/11/2015

21/05/2016

03/11/2016

20/05/2017

05/11/2017

Dates

EU Portugal Spain

Figure 9.1  Trust in the national parliament in Portugal, Spain and the EU, 2001–2017. Source: Eurobarometer (http://ec.europa.eu/commfrontoffice/publicopinion/index.cfm/Chart/ index) Note: Values are the percentage of interviewees who tend to trust in the national parliament.

154  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

In the late 1990s, the main factors of trust in parliament in Portugal and Spain were related to support for the incumbent party. Furthermore, in the Spanish case, in addition to age and education, ideological radicalism had an impact in trust levels insofar as more extreme citizens expressed less trust on their legislative chamber (Magalhães 2002, 2003). Looking at data from the late 2000s, Teixeira and Freire (2010) show that trust in the parliament seemed to be more rooted in cultural and political factors in Spain than in Portugal, where both political and economic factors (employment status, assessment of the country’s economic situation) mattered. To what extent has the financial crisis and its political consequences stress the relevance of economic factors in Portugal and Spain? Torcal (2014) explores the role of citizens’ assessments of the economy and political responsiveness during the peak of the financial crisis (2008–2012). The author concludes that, together with perceptions of corruption, political responsiveness is the most important and robust predictor of trust in parliament. Interestingly, the study also reports a significant effect of economic perceptions on trust in parliament. Torcal’s findings could be used to argue that the financial crisis harmonized the factors underlying trust in parliament in the two countries and enhanced the role of political responsiveness/external political efficacy, especially in Spain. Studies on trust on parliament using aggregate data lend support to the relevance of economic factors. Muro and Vidal (2016) test the effects of political and economic indicators on aggregate levels of trust in political institutions in Italy, Portugal, Greece and Spain. Their multivariate analysis highlights the relevance of economic factors, such as public debt, even when controlling for political variables. The authors confirm the impact of perceptions of corruption and of assessments of the government’s record. ­Fernandes and colleagues examine trust in national political institutions in five Southern European democracies, from 2000 through 2015. The authors corroborate previous findings: higher levels of trust in Parliament are correlated with lower rates of unemployment and poverty risk, lower levels of corruption at the executive level and lower centralization of the candidate selection process (Fernandes et al. 2019). Overall, studies support the idea that both economic and political factors matter. Interestingly enough, both Portuguese and Spanish citizens themselves select corruption as the main factor of mistrust (CIS 2012; Belchior et al. 2014; Jaime-Castillo et al. 2016).

Satisfaction with the way parliaments work and other attitudes

One of the first systematic studies of attitudes towards the parliament in Portugal analysed aggregate data on the perceptions citizens had of the parliament’s performance in the 1980s and 1990s (Magalhães 2002). Most citizens expressed a moderate assessment of the parliament’s performance,

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  155

as indicated by 52–74 per cent of the respondents choosing the response “so-so”. Typically, after legislative elections, the parliament has benefited from a popularity peak, resulting in a sort of honeymoon effect. Magalhães (2002) suggests that the Portuguese parliament is perceived as a distant political institution, too dependent on single-party majoritarian governments and strict party discipline. In Spain, available data on satisfaction with the way the parliament works cover the 1990s and 2006. Typically, less than half of the Spanish citizens declared themselves pleased with the performance of their national parliament (28–46 per cent). Such pattern is probably related to the fact that most citizens see MPs as devoting too much attention to irrelevant issues, a position held by 61 per cent of the Spaniards (CIS 2010). According to the data reported by Oñate (2003), these perceptions have worsened. Moreover, there has been a degradation in the way citizens assess the informational role of parliamentary debates. In Portugal, in 2006–2008, around six out of ten respondents agreed completely or partially that parliamentary debates contributed to inform citizens (Viegas 2009; Freire and Viegas 2009). In 2012 and 2014 this figure was about 20 per cent points lower (Freire et al. 2012; Belchior et al. 2014). In Spain, there has been a steady growth in the support to the idea that the parliamentary annual debate is not useful (28 per cent in 2010 and 41 per cent in 2014). The general reputation of MPs is also an issue in Iberian legislatures. In 2014, only 16 per cent of the Portuguese believed that MPs, once elected, tried to fulfil the pledges made during the election campaign (Belchior et al. 2014). Thus, it is not surprising that, in 2008, 58 per cent of the Portuguese believed that the number of mandates in the parliament should be limited by law (Freire and Viegas 2009). A few years later, 87 per cent were completely or partially in favour of reducing the current number of parliamentary seats to the minimum allowed by the Constitution (Freire et al. 2012). Accordingly, in 2005, 57 per cent of the Spaniards believed that the main reason for someone to run for a parliamentary seat was the power and influence stemming from the position. At the same time, only 26 per cent believed that the desire to participate in the resolution of the country’s problems or fight for her own and her party ideals were the main motivations (CIS 2005).

Focus and style of representation

According to Eulau et al. (1959), there are two important aspects in the analysis of political representation: the focus and the style of representation. The former defines who MPs represent (the population as a whole, their voters, their party, their electoral district?). The latter addresses the question of the criteria MPs use in their decision-making processes (do and should they act following the mandate of their voters, follow party guidelines or vote according to their own judgement?). In this section, we explore these two dimensions.

156  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

Focus of representation

Table 9.1 shows that Portuguese citizens tend to have a rather party-­centric vision of representation. MPs represent first and foremost their parties and, in the second place, their constituents. Indeed, such vision is aligned with constitutional provisions whereby MPs have a country-level mandate at the expense of their district. However, for 64 per cent of the Portuguese, it is only natural that MPs try to benefit their electoral districts (Freire et al. 2012). Turning to the Spanish case, Table 9.1 shows that a plurality of citizens believe that MPs representation is more in line with the formal design of the Congress of Deputies, intended to be a chamber to represent the population, whereas territorial representation is guaranteed by the Senate. To be sure, in 2012, 31.6 per cent of the respondents acknowledged that MPs represent the population as a whole. Interestingly, a roughly similar percentage of respondents considers that MPs should represent their party. By contrast, only 6.9 per cent see MPs as representatives of their electoral districts. There is a considerable degree of congruence in how Spanish legislative elites and citizens regard the focus of parliamentary representation ­(Méndez-Lago and Martínez 2002). However, 87 per cent of Spanish citizens believe that MPs should establish a stronger dyadic representation with their district by paying more visits and keeping tabs on the problems and claims of their constituents. Furthermore, 66 per cent of the respondents think that MPs should live in the district where they have been elected (CIS 2005). For all the importance for citizens of an increased electoral connection, Spanish institutional setting provides weak incentives, as Field’s chapter in this volume shows. The idea of MPs as efficient representatives of the citizenry is not predominant at all. In 2002, 43 per cent of the Portuguese believed that members

Table 9.1  Who do MPs represent?

Portugal Spain

2008 2012 2005 2012

His/her electoral district 40 31 4.0 6.9 His/her voters 50 39 23.8 18.3 The population in general 41 31 35.8 31.6 His/her party 67 68 27.8 30.3 Specific social groups 36 Not asked 1.7 0.5

Source: CIS 2005, 2012; Freire and Viegas 2009; Freire et al. 2012.

Note: Questions and modes of reply are slightly different. In Portugal, several ­questions were posed, and the figures are the percentage of citizens who agree completely or agree with each possible focus of representation. In the case of Spain, respondents had to select only one option.

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  157

of the Assembleia da República had little or no idea of what citizens think, while only 30 per cent said that MPs had a fair or good grasp on public opinion concerns (Freire et al. 2003). In Spain, this latter opinion was expressed by a similar proportion of citizens (Freire and Meirinho 2012). These figures placed the two Iberian countries slightly above average in a sample of democracies (Freire and Meirinho 2012). Moreover, in the early 2000s, only about 30 per cent believed that the opinions of the MPs reflected perfectly or fairly well those of their voters – a figure that placed Portugal well below the average of 33 democratic regimes, and well below Spain, where two-thirds of the citizens felt their opinions fairly or well represented by MPs (Freire et al. 2003, 2006; Freire and Meirinho 2012). In the last ten years, the proportion of Portuguese citizens holding this positive attitude plummeted and reached a worrisome 9 per cent in 2014 (Freire and Viegas 2009; Belchior et al. 2014; Freire et al. 2017). Furthermore, in 2008, only one in every five Portuguese citizens believed that the laws reflected the interests of the majority of the population, and 60 per cent agreed to some extent that private interests had too much weight on the law-making process (Freire and Viegas 2009). The latter figure has risen to 75 per cent in 2012 and 81 per cent in 2016–2017 (Freire et al., 2012, 2017). Oñate (2003) reports data showing that, before 2000, 60 per cent of the Spaniards considered that MPs did not defend their interests at all, or hardly. In 1998, the majority of Spaniards considered that they were very or considerably concerned with their own interests and those of their party and hardly or not worried at all with the needs of their voters.

Style of representation

Regarding their style of representation, MPs can act as trustee, delegate, or politico (Eulau et al. 1959: 749–750). In the first case, representatives act freely by taking decisions according to their own assessment of the situation. On the contrary, by acting as delegates, MPs subordinate their independence to the will or mandate of a superior authority. Finally, representatives act as politicos when they follow a mix of both orientations. The more complex the decisions, the closer the role of representatives to that of the trustee (idem: 751). Over the past ten years, multiple surveys show that, if MPs face competing incentives from their party and their voters, a majority of the Portuguese voters consider that voters’ opinion should prevail. This figure increased to 88 per cent in 2016–2017 from 70 per cent in 2008. About three out of each four Spanish and Portuguese citizens contend that MPs should decide according to the opinions of voters in their electoral district, even if they hold a different opinion on the matter (Freire and Viegas 2009; CIS 2012; Freire et al. 2012, 2017). The Portuguese seem to be more divided when faced with a conflict between the opinion of an individual MP and the party she belongs. In 2008,

158  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

almost half of the voters (49 per cent)3 considered that such situations the vote should be in line with the party position (Freire and Viegas 2009). In 2012 and 2016–2017, the most expressive opinion (44 and 65 per cent, respectively), was that the MP should vote according to his own opinion (Freire et al. 2012, 2017). Turning to Spain, in 2007 and 2009, the most relevant group (around one-third) supported the idea of MPs behaving in accordance with their own judgement (CIS 2007, 2009). Previous data on this, from the 1984–1997 period, show a completely divided Spanish society regarding this matter (Méndez-Lago and Martínez 2002). In sum, when the conflict affects the party and the MP, both Portuguese and Spaniards prefer that representatives play the role of trustee, and do not subordinate his/her actions to those of the party. However, this view coexists with a clear contradiction, as the predominant view amongst both Spanish (around 70 per cent; CIS 1994–2011; Méndez and Martínez 2002), and Portuguese citizens (57 per cent in 2008, according to Freire and Viegas 2009) think that if an MP abandons the party they must give up their seat and be replaced by another MP of the same party. In other words, the majority thinks that MPs must be subordinated to the party, in accordance with the electoral system rules (proportional, based on closed and blocked lists defined by the party organization).

Candidate selection and electoral system

Primaries and gender quotas

The non-preferential nature of the electoral system in Portugal and Spain has sparked, in recent years, a debate on candidate selection. Specifically, how parties should select their personnel. In this section, we focus on the Iberian citizen’s attitudes regarding less party-centric modalities of candidate selection and the implementation of quotas fostering the presence of women in parliament and therefore tackling known and overwhelming asymmetries in terms of descriptive representation. In the last decade, an overwhelming majority of Portuguese citizens – up to 80 per cent – believed it would be important that party members were able to select MP candidates by means of primaries (Freire and Viegas 2009; Viegas 2009). The Spanish public opinion seems to be divided between those in favour of opening up the election of the candidates of political parties to all of society (35–40 per cent) and those who would leave it in the hands of the party members, or of party members and sympathizers (around 35 per cent altogether). Few (around 12–13 per cent), however, would leave it in the hands of the internal party organs (CIS 2007, 2009). In both countries, there seems to be support for more inclusive, democratic and transparent modalities of candidate selection in a context of closed and blocked list electoral systems.

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  159

What about gender quotas? In 2006, almost half of the Portuguese (48 per cent) was neither in favour nor against gender quotas in candidate lists (Viegas 2009). In spite of this, the measure would be implemented that same year (Baum and Espírito-Santo 2012). At that time, only 23 per cent clearly supported this measure. However, only two years later, the support for this measure almost doubled (Freire and Viegas 2009). In 2012, 66 per cent of the population were in favour of gender quotas (Freire et al. 2012). This trend is certainly not unrelated with an evolution in terms of how citizens perceive the gender misrepresentation in Parliament. In 2008, when asked if the fact that 4 out of 5 MPs are male posed a serious problem for the Portuguese democracy, the citizens were divided, and 45 per cent disagreed with that statement (Freire and Viegas 2009). Four years later, only 28 per cent discard this fact as a threat to the quality of democracy in Portugal (Freire et al. 2012). In Spain, citizens are divided in this respect, as two similar groups (43 per cent) back and reject, respectively, the idea that the parties should guarantee some positions for specific groups such as women or youngsters in their lists (CIS 2012).

The electoral system

Reforming the electoral system used in legislative elections is a recurring topic in the Portuguese public sphere. Parties, journalists and experts recurrently discuss the need to implement reforms and dissect the details of concrete proposals. The panorama, however, has been one of remarkable stability (Freire and Meirinho 2012; see also Sampaio 2009). To what extent is this stability linked to the fact that public opinion is satisfied with the system currently in practice? The average citizen’s notion of the electoral system is often quite generic and crude (Curtice 2004; Freire and Meirinho 2012), which makes the specificities of electoral systems a difficult issue to explore in terms of mass opinions and attitudes. Nevertheless, in the last decades, survey data on how citizens perceive the electoral system’s main features has been collected both in Portugal and Spain. In what follows, we analyse the most relevant data available. In 2008, 41 per cent of the Portuguese supported the ideal of proportional representation in the parliament, with a close resemblance between the vote shares and seat shares each party gets, but an expressive minority of 32 per cent would favour a certain degree of disproportionality leading to the most voted party getting the majority of the parliamentary seats (Freire and Viegas 2009). Interestingly enough, an overwhelming majority of MPs interviewed on the same occasion were supportive of the ideal of proportionality (around 80 per cent), a finding that the authors explain as being due to the fact that the Portuguese electoral system is disproportional enough to permit single-party majorities, and that proportionality is a constitutional requirement (Freire and Meirinho 2012). Four years later, the support for the proportional representation ideal had grown considerably, being favoured

160  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

by 52 per cent of the citizens, and the preference for a disproportional result shrunk to 18 per cent (Freire et al. 2012). Citizens, however, are not pleased with all the aspects of the current electoral system. For instance, over the last ten years, an overwhelming majority of Portuguese citizens has been in favour of ending the monopoly political parties have in terms of presenting lists in legislative elections, being therefore favourable to having groups of citizens running as well. The support to this change of the electoral system grew from about two-thirds of the respondents in 2006–2008 to 72 per cent in 2012 and 81 per cent in 2014 (­Viegas 2009; Freire et al. 2012, Belchior et al. 2014). The goal of creating more favourable conditions for a closer relationship between MPs and their constituents lies at the heart of most proposals for electoral reform in Portugal presented in the last two decades (Freire and Meirinho 2012; Lobo and Santana-Pereira 2015). Citizens tend to see this goal as desirable, and there is a longitudinal trend of increase in terms of support to this idea. In 2008, 58 per cent of the citizens in Portugal agreed that it should be possible to vote more for candidates and less for parties; more recently, this opinion is held by roughly three in every four interviewees (Freire and Viegas 2009; Freire et al. 2012, 2017). In Spain, the pattern is similar, with two-thirds of the citizens in favour of such an electoral reform, and one-third even consider closed lists to be antidemocratic (CIS 2005, 2007). The biggest group of Spaniards (30–40 per cent), however, does not have an opinion about the electoral system, at least in 2007. As it stands, the current electoral system does not foster links between voters and candidates. Ballot structures include only party labels and, as a consequence, voters do not know candidate names. The percentage of Spanish citizens who remember the name of the candidate heading the list of the political party they voted for in the most recent legislative elections tends to be very low (Oñate 2003). Data collected in 2000 estimated it to be of around 35 per cent (CIS 2000). In Portugal, data from the Portuguese Election Study of 2002 shows that less than 30 per cent of the Portuguese citizens believed they were able to recall the name of any candidates running in their own electoral district, only a few months after the election had taken place, and only 19 per cent mentioned a correct name (Freire et al. 2003). This lack of knowledge about the specific candidates is unsurprising if one considers the fact that in both countries legislative elections use closed and blocked party lists. Citizens formally vote for parties, not for candidates nor for candidate lists.

Conclusion

This chapter sought to provide a panoramic understanding of the Portuguese and Spanish citizens’ attitudes towards their parliaments, by analysing the available survey data and previous studies on this matter.

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  161

The analysis of this data allows us to conclude in favour of the existence of general diffuse support, but often negative attitudes towards the parliament in both countries. A majority of Spanish and Portuguese citizens consider the Parliament a relevant institution. Nevertheless, most citizens are uninterested in the parliament’s activities and unable to recall the name of its president. Distrust is considerable, but there is a great deal of volatility in this attitude, with the great recession taking a toll on the trustworthiness of parliaments in the eyes of Portuguese and Spanish citizens. The literature on these two cases identifies as main explaining factors political attitudes not directly related with the parliamentary itself (corruption, political responsiveness, support for the incumbent party and assessment of the government’s record), but the economy also matters. Specific support for the parliament is as feeble as trust. Citizens are not too enthusiastic when asked to assess this institution’s performance. Regarding attitudes in terms of the focus and style of representation, the Portuguese display a rather party-centric perception of representation, while the Spaniards display a more universalistic conception of the representation offered in parliament. Also, both the Spaniards and the Portuguese believe that MPs have no idea of what the average citizen thinks, and especially the latter do not feel that the MPs positions reflect the opinions of voters. In both countries the idea that personal motivations and interests outweigh the desire to represent the people’s interests is predominant. Regarding the style of representation, most citizens think that MPs should represent their voters’ opinions when these are in disagreement with the party’s position or the MPs themselves. When MPs disagree with their parties, citizens are split, but there is a trend of increasing consensus surrounding the idea that MPs should vote according to their own positions. In spite of this, and of very critical attitudes towards parties, citizens think that if an MP abandons their party, they should also abandon the seat, in consonance with the logic of party democracy (Méndez and Martínez 2002; Méndez 2006). Finally, citizens support a more participatory modality of candidate selection, and quotas that ensure a better balance in the presence of men and women in parliament. In both countries, the time is ripe for changes fostering a more personalized vote instead of closed lists. Against this negative backdrop, and despite the scarcity of recent data, it seems there are nowadays good news for Iberian MPs, as trustworthiness in the Parliament is on the rise. However, the positive trend observed in the last few years may only be partly due to the performance of parliamentary institutions strictu sensu and more directly connected with the general political and economic landscape.

Notes

1 A rather common way to ask citizens how much they trust their national parliament is by including the following question in a survey that is asked to a representative sample of the population: “I would like to ask you a question about how much trust you have in certain media and institutions. For each of the following media and institutions, please tell me if you tend to trust it or tend not to

162  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

trust it”. The (NATIONALITY) Parliament. Answers: Tend to trust/Tend not to trust/DK – Don’t know. See graph based on the Eurobarometer surveys below. 2 In this chapter, all percentages have been calculated including the cases in which respondents opted for not responding or claimed they did not know the answer. 3 Twenty per cent were unwilling or unable to respond.

References

Bacalhau, Mário. (1994). Atitudes, Opiniões e Comportamentos Políticos dos Portugueses: 1973–1993. Lisbon: FLAD. Baum, Michael and Ana Espírito-Santo (2012). Portugal’s Quota-Parity Law: An Analysis of its Adoption. West European Politics, 35(2), 319–342. Belchior, Ana, Sofia Serra da Silva and Viriato Queiroga (2014). Panel Survey to the Portuguese population –First Wave. Project “Public Preferences and Policy ­Decision-Making. A Longitudinal and Comparative Analysis”. Data set available upon request. Bianco, William T. (1994). Trust: Representatives and Constituents. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Bosco, Anna and Susannah Verney (2012). Electoral Epidemic: The Political Cost of Economic Crisis in Southern Europe, 2010–11. South European Society and Politics, 17(2), 129–154. Bosco, Anna and Susannah Verney (2017). From Electoral Epidemic to Government Epidemic: The Next Level of the Crisis in Southern Europe. South European Society and Politics, 21(4), 383–406. CIS (1994–2011). Survey Data Trend A.1.02.03.019. Available online. CIS (2000). Postelectoral Elecciones Generales y Autonómicas de Andalucía 2000. Panel (2ª Fase). Estudio nº 2384. Available online. CIS (2003). Barómetro de Septiembre. Estudio nº 2535. Available online. CIS (2005). Representación y Participación Política en España. Estudio nº 2588. Available online. CIS (2007). Calidad de la Democracia I. Estudio nº 2701. Available online. CIS (2008). Barómetro de Noviembre 2008. Estudio nº 2778. Available online. CIS (2009). Calidad de la Democracia II. Estudio nº 2790. Available online. CIS (2010). Barometro de Noviembre 2010. Estudio nº 2853. Available online. CIS (2012). Congruencia Ideológica entre Electores y Representantes Políticos. Estudio nº 2930. Available online. Curtice, John (2004). Proportional Representation in Scotland: Public Reaction and Voter Behaviour. Representation, 40(4), 329–341. De Giorgi, Elisabetta and José Santana-Pereira (2016). The 2015 Legislative Elections in Portugal: Widening the Coalitional Space and Letting the Extreme left in. South European Society and Politics, 21(4), 451–468. Easton, David (1965). A Systems Analysis of Political Life. New York: Wiley. Easton, David (1975). A Re-Assessment of the Concept of Political Support. British Journal of Political Science, 5(4), 435–457. Eulau, Heinz, John C. Wahlke, William Buchanan and Leroy C. Ferguson (1959). The Role of the Representative: Some Empirical Observations on the Theory of Edmund Burke. American Political Science Review, 53(3), 742–756. Fernandes, Tiago, José Santana-Pereira, João Cancela and Edalina Rodrigues Sanches (2019). Cultura Política, Instituições e Qualidade da Democracia na ­Europa do Sul, 1970s – 2010s. Lisbon: Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos.

Iberian citizens’ attitudes towards Parliament and representation  163

Field, Bonnie N. (2016). Why Minority Governments Work: Multilevel Territorial Politics in Spain. London: Springer. Freire, André and Manuel Meirinho Martins (2012). Institutional Reform in Portugal: From the Perspective of Deputies and Voters perspectives. Pole Sud, 36, 107–125. Freire, André, Marina Costa Lobo, Pedro Magalhães and Ana Espírito-Santo (2003). As eleições legislativas de 2002 – inquérito pós-eleitoral. Lisbon: ICS. Freire, André, Marina Costa Lobo and Pedro Magalhães (2006). Inquérito

­pós-­eleitoral – eleições legislativas de 2005 e presidenciais de 2006. Data set available upon request. Freire, André and José Manuel Viegas (2009). Inquérito à População Portuguesa – Base de Dados, 2008. Data set available in André Freire, José Manuel Viegas and Filipa Seiceira, (eds.), Representação política em Portugal – Inquéritos e Bases de Dados. Lisbon: Sextante. Freire, André, José Manuel Leite Viegas and Marco Lisi (2012). Inquérito aos Cidadãos Portugueses 2012. Dataset. Available online at: http://er.cies.iscte-iul.pt/ Freire, André, Marco Lisi and Emmanuoil Tsatsanis (2017). Inquérito aos Eleitores Portugueses 2016–2018: Eleições 2015. Dataset. Available online at: http://er.cies. iscte-iul.pt/ Gallagher, Michael and Peter Marsh (1988). Candidate Selection in Comparative Perspective: The Secret Garden of Politics. London: Sage Publications Ltd. Hetherington, Mark J. (1998). The Political Relevance of Political Trust. American Political Science Review, 92(4), 791–808. Holmberg, Soren, Staffan Lindberg and Richard Svensson (2017). Trust in Parliament. Journal of Public Affairs, 17(1–2), e1647. Jaime-Castillo, Antonio M., Edurne Bartolomé and Gloria Martínez-Cousinou (2016). Desconfianza, desprestigio y desafección. In Xavier Coller, Antonio M. Jaime-Castillo and Fabiola Mota (eds.), El Poder Político En España: Parlamentarios y Ciudadanía (pp. 167–186). Madrid: Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas. Lobo, Marina Costa and José Santana Pereira (2015). Uma proposta para a reforma do sistema político: A abertura das listas partidárias às eleições legislativas. In Viriato Soromenho Marques and Paulo Trigo Pereira (eds.), Afirmar o Futuro – Políticas Públicas para Portugal. Volume 1: Estado, Instituições e Políticas Sociais (pp. 38–77). Lisbon: Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian. López Nieto, Lourdes (2017). Balance sobre el quehacer del congreso de los diputados, 1977–2011. In César Colino, Jaime Ferri Durá, José A. Olmeda, Paloma Román Marugán and María Josefa Rubio Lara (eds.), Ciencia y Política, Una Aventura Vital: Libro Homenaje a Ramón Cotarelo (pp. 477–498). Madrid: INAP. Magalhães, Pedro (2002). A Imagem de Assembleia da Republica na Opinião

­Pública Portuguesa. In André Freire, António Araujo, Cristina Leston-Bandeira, Marina Costa Lobo and Pedro Magalhães (eds.), O Parlamento Português: Uma Reforma Necessária. Lisbon: Instituto de Ciências Sociais. pp. 133–156. Magalhães, Pedro (2003). A confiança nos parlamentos nacionais: regras institucionais, representação e responsabilização política. Análise Social, 167, 443–465. Mansbridge, Jane (2003). Rethinking Representation. American Political Science Review, 97(4), 515–528. Martínez, Ismael Crespo and Jordi Calvet Crespo (1998). Parlamento y opinión

­pública en España. Revista Mexicana de Sociologia, 60(2), 95–120. Méndez-Lago, Monica and Antonia Martínez (2002). Political Representation in Spain: An Empirical Analysis of the Perception of Citizens and MPs. Journal of Legislative Studies, 8(1), 63–90.

AU: Please provide the page range for references “Freire and Viegas (2009), Leston-Bandeira (2002), López Nieto (2017), Magalhães (2002), Viegas (2009)”.

164  José Santana-Pereira and Irene Martín

Méndez-Lago, Mónica (2006). La representación política en España: percepciones de diputados y ciudadanos. In Antonia Martínez (ed.), Representación y calidad de la democracia en España (pp. 117–143). Madrid: Tecnos. Mishler, William and Richard Rose (2001). What Are the Origins of Political Trust? Testing Institutional and Cultural Theories in Post-Communist Societies. Comparative Political Studies, 34(1): 30–62. Montero, José Ramón (1989). Parlamento y opinión pública: Las perceptiones e los niveles de apoyo de las Cortes Generales. Revista del Centro de Estudios Constitucionales, 2, 65–95. Mota, Fabiola (2016). La representación política parlamentaria. In Xavier Coller, Antonio M. Jaime and Fabiola Mota (eds.), El Poder Político En España: Parlamentarios y Ciudadanía (pp. 143–166). Madrid: Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas. Muro, Diego and Guillem Vidal (2016). Political Mistrust in Southern Europe Since the Great Recession. Mediterranean Politics, 22(2), 197–217. Oñate, Pablo (2003). Parliament and Citizenship in Spain: Twenty Five Years of Mismatch? Journal of Legislative Studies, 9(2), 130–150. Przeworski, Adam, Susan C. Stokes and Bernard Manin (1999). Democracy, Accountability, and Representation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sampaio, Nuno (2009). O Sistema Eleitoral Português: Crónica de uma reforma anunciada. Lisbon: Alethêia. Teixeira, Conceição Pequito and André Freire (2010). Decline, Transformation and Trust in Parliaments: The Portuguese Case in a Longitudinal and Comparative Perspective. Revista Ibero-Americana de Estudos Legislativos, 1(1), 24–37. Torcal, Mariano, Richard Gunther and José Ramón Montero (2002). Anti-Party Sentiments in Southern Europe. In Richard Gunther, José Ramón Montero and Juan J. Linz (eds.), Political Parties: Old Concepts and New Challenges (pp. ­257–290). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Torcal, Mariano (2014). The Decline of Political Trust in Spain and Portugal: Economic Performance or Political Responsiveness? American Behavioral Scientist, 58(12), 1542–1567. Viegas, José Manuel (2009). Deliberação e Participação Democráticas – Base de Dados, 2006. Data set available in André Freire and José Manuel Viegas(eds.) Representação política em Portugal – Inquéritos e Bases de Dados. Lisbon, Sextante.

Section IV Legislative processes

Introduction

Portugal and Spain share a common history. Both countries were under dictatorships for a similar period of time and they joined the European Community (EEC) together in 1986. In managing their transition to democracy in the 1970s/1980s, these countries had to change their legislative frameworks into democratic ones more or less at the same time, resulting in similarities in their procedural framework for the legislative process. However, Portugal and Spain have different types of political system, with different structures of parliament, legal and political backgrounds, forms of government and constitutional and legislative frameworks. Some common factors exist in their legislative process though, as this chapter shows. Common features of their legislative procedures include the entities entitled to initiate laws, the number and structure of readings and the role of the parliamentary groups [PGs] and of parliamentary committees. The similarities are partly the result of a common history, but also of ongoing communication between these two legislatures. We start our analysis by outlining the institutional framework and structures that frame the legislative process in these parliaments, to then proceed to analyse legislative performance over the past 40 years of democratic rule and finally consider some more recent developments towards strengthening transparency and enhancing citizen accessibility.

Institutional framework for the legislative process in Spain and Portugal

Despite similarities in their legislative procedures, the structure of the State is a key significant difference between Portugal and Spain and has a direct impact on the legislative process: the 17 autonomous communities in Spain act as federal states with legislative power, whilst in Portugal it is mainly the central State that legislates (government and parliament). Another key difference lies in the fact that the Spanish Legislature is bicameral, whereas the Portuguese Parliament, Assembleia da República (AR), is unicameral.

10 The legislative role of Iberian parliaments

Cláudia Ribeiro, Mercedes Araújo and Sónia Rodrigues

168  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

Spanish bicameralism is constitutionally shaped as imperfect, being unbalanced in favour of the lower chamber, the Congreso de los Diputados (CdlD), which, for instance, has exclusivity of key competences such as government investiture and accountability, conferring the Senate to a clearly subordinated role in the legislative function. The AR is the principal source of legislative power in Portugal, sharing it mainly with government. Parliament has the power to enact legislation on all matters, except for those which are the exclusive responsibility of the government. Its legislative powers sub-divide into three types of competence, which relate to different areas of policy: (a) exclusive competence: matters that can only be legislated by parliament, such as elections, the state budget, the underlying principles of education and national defence; (b) partial exclusive competence: matters that parliament can delegate to government by means of delegated legislation, such as rights and freedoms, tax system, agricultural policy and information services and (c) shared competence: matters not covered by exclusive or partial competence, where both parliament and government may enact legislation. The power to initiate a bill lies with MPs, PGs, government, groups of 20,000 registered voters, and the legislative assemblies of the Autonomous Regions (Azores and Madeira). The latter approve regional regulations and may present draft bills to the AR. The Portuguese Constitution grants equal value to laws (deriving from parliament) and decrees-law (deriving from government). It is important to underline also that legislative power is more and more fragmented in both countries. In addition to parliament and government, we are also witnessing the multiplication of political players and pressure groups in society, often people with different interests. The so-called soft power has a growing influence in legislation. From trade unions to powers in the legal, business and communications worlds, there is a widespread of entities that have the means and tools to exercise substantial power. Similarly to Portugal, parliament holds the heart of legislative power in Spain. Government can also issue laws in the form of royal decrees and legislative decrees, but the former need ratification by the CdlD and the latter are delegated legislation. Thus, even if initiated outside the institution, legislative power needs to go through parliament, requiring its intervention one way or another. Overall, legislation can be initiated by government, the Congress and the Senate, the Legislative Assemblies of the Autonomous Regions and by popular legislative initiative through the collation of 500,000 signatures; as in Portugal, signatures can be collected electronically. In relation to the Senate, save for a few exceptions, bills must be initiated in the Congress, which also has the last word, delegating the Senate to a secondary revising role; still, within its vetoing power, it has on occasion forced the Congress to think again in relation to key legislation, such as the stage budgets for 2005 or 2011, for example. Resulting from a combination between the key role played by parties and the parliamentary governance system, the Spanish model entails a close

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  169

cooperation between parliament and government, bodies which, in turn, legitimize decisions taken by the parties (García-Pelayo 1977: 59–61). This results in a clear predominance of the executive of the ordinary legislative process, particularly when the government is supported by a majority in parliament. Thus, government’s legislative initiative prevails, with its bills being considered on a priority basis over parliament’s bills. Government’s bills’ priority in the consideration process is but one of the many expressions of the rationalized parliamentary regime enshrined in the system (García-Escudero 2000). Another key difference between Spain and Portugal lies in the fact that the latter is a semi-presidential system, which, amongst other key powers, means that the directly elected President of the Republic has some vetoing legislative powers. The President is responsible for promulgating parliamentary laws and governmental decrees-law or regulatory decrees, being able to veto these also. The presidential veto on government legislation is final. However, in relation to parliamentary legislation, parliament can force the enactment of vetoed legislation, through the (re-)approval of the bill by absolute majority, or a two-thirds majority in the case of specifically significant legislation (for example, organic laws, electoral laws and laws concerning foreign relations). This indicates the important role of the AR in the legislative process. These vetoes, and their subsequent consideration in parliament, can also result in an amendment of the law in line with the president’s suggestions. The president has therefore important revising powers. During the current legislature (2015–2019), the President of the Republic has so far vetoed seven parliament bills. Besides this veto power, the President can also refer bills to the Constitutional Court to check their constitutionality. The Portuguese institutional framework of the legislative process reflects therefore a solid balance of powers between its key institutions, with parliament playing a crucial role at its core. This is particularly patent in the current socialist minority government, which is effectively kept in power simply through a negotiated support with two of the opposition left-wing PGs, in exchange for specific policy concessions and with the objective to block a right-wing minority government. This solution turned the attention to the Portuguese Parliament, which has become the central player in the political landscape. The main bills have to be negotiated in Parliament and the opposition parties – namely the ones supporting the government, but also the other ones in some specific issues – are able to approve more bills. For instance, between September 2017 and July 2018, despite being the 3rd political force in the Portuguese parliament, the Left Bloc was the PG with the highest number of bills approved. In Spain, popular sovereignty is embedded through its Constitution, which establishes that national sovereignty belongs to the Spanish people, from which all State powers emanate and which is expressed in the political form of Parliamentary Monarchy. It is important to bear in mind this dual representative role when considering parliament’s legislative role.

170  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

Amendments to the constitution: expanding parliament’s role or adapting it to a new era?

The Portuguese Constitution has been amended seven times since its approval in 1976 (1982, 1989, 1992, 1997, 2001, 2004 and 2005). Most of these reforms enhanced the powers of the parliament, but also seized the opportunity to introduce substantive changes according to society trends. This is in clear contrast with Spain, which has undergone only two revisions. Since 1976, Parliament has always been referred to as an organ of sovereignty, defined as the “representative assembly of all Portuguese citizens”. Thus, theoretically, each Member represents all the citizens and not just the specific district through they are elected, or their party’s voters. However, in a contradictory way, significant powers are ascribed directly to the PGs, to the detriment of individual Members. In short, the revision of 1982 created the Constitutional Court which has a key role regarding the legislative process, checking the compliance of bills with the Constitution. The 1989 revision set out an important tool of direct democracy – the referendum – and established the distribution of petitions to the competent parliamentary committees. The 1992 and 1997 amendments reinforced parliament’s exclusive legislative powers and introduced citizens’ right to present legislative proposals to parliament. The revision of 2004 increased the political and administrative autonomy of the two Autonomous Regions, namely by strengthening the powers of their legislative assemblies. Finally, the 2005 revision added a new article to the Constitution, allowing the holding of a referendum on the approval of treaties concerning the European Union. In parallel to this, political control of governmental policy has developed over the years, expanding parliament’s role in monitoring public policies carried out by government. In Spain, the Constitution of 1978 has only been amended twice, in both cases to respond to EU pressure. The first amendment, adopted in 1992, and supported in parliament by all PGs, allowed European citizens to vote and run for office in local elections. The second took place in 2011 and was not as consensual, setting out the principle of budget stability. Like in Portugal, the Spanish Constitution can be amended through two different procedures, a simpler one and a more demanding:

• the ordinary one works for most of the articles and demands a threefifths majority of Members in each House. If it is impossible to reach an agreement between the Houses, a Joint Committee is set out and the amendment is passed by a two-thirds majority in Congress and an absolute majority in the Senate. Moreover, one-tenth of the deputies or senators can impose a binding referendum to ratify the amendment. • a specific one, aiming to secure specific issues of particular significance such the “indissoluble union” of Spain, fundamental rights and the Crown. To amend these, a majority of two-thirds in both houses needs

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  171

to be achieved and parliament is dissolved. Once the amendment is approved by two-thirds on the newly elected Houses, a referendum is held to ratify it.

Most scholars criticize this burdensome procedure, which in part explains the lower number of constitutional revisions. The current political situation in Spain has brought to light some public pressure to change the provisions of the Constitution. Never a provision of the Constitution had been so widely spoken as the Article 155, used by the central government to suspend self-rule in Catalonia after the voting of the unilateral declaration of independence by the regional parliament. Public opinion discussions have focused mainly on the need to change territorial organization, but this task seems difficult given the lack of absolute majorities. Regional financing and reforming the Senate are also on the table, despite the difficulties involved.

Major bills on which parliaments have a key role

The recent economic crisis in Southern Europe has caused a paradigm shift in what were considered the most relevant parliamentary bills. It is in this context that the legislative process to amend the law establishing the framework for the budgetary procedure in Portugal became particularly important. However, other legislation also has particular significance, such as that relating to national planning, and respective reports on its implementation, the State budget, general accounts of the State and other public accounts. These follow a specific parliamentary legislative procedure, completely different from the common legislative process, enshrined in the rules of procedure. Furthermore, organic laws, a specific type of bills that form the structure of the political system, are also considered particularly significant, as they deal with key fundamental matters, such as election to sovereign bodies, referendum, organization of national defence, or the acquisition, loss and reacquisition of Portuguese citizenship. To be approved, these bills require an absolute majority vote. Contrary to the Portuguese case, the Spanish Constitution establishes that the budgetary initiative belongs to the government (art. 134 SC). This means not only that it is exclusively incumbent upon the government to present the draft annual State Budget, with no room for tabling non-­government bills, but also that:

• It is not possible to table amendments to the whole presenting an alternative text to the said bill, in the very unlikely case that any PG was technically able to do so, but only amendments calling to the return of the text to the government. • Only the government can introduce direct amendments to the annual budget bill, by means of the extraordinary appropriations and the appropriation supplements (Moreno Ara 2012).

172  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

• Once the State General Budget has been adopted, the government may ­table bills entailing an increase of public expenditure or a decrease of the revenues corresponding to the same budget year, whilst those proposals or amendments involving an increase of appropriations or a decrease in budget revenue require previous approval by government before its approval.

The central nature of the budget debate within parliamentary life means that all other activities, legislative or not, must be adapted to the calendar envisaged for its consideration. The political significance of the draft annual budget often turns it into a question of confidence, so that, once it is tabled, the chamber ratifies, or not, its confidence in the government to conduct its political program. This is illustrated by the dissolution of parliament in 1996, following a rejection of the government’s state budget proposal. Also indicating the importance of the budget bill, it is worth noting that the Senate’s veto power has been exercised almost exclusively in relation to draft Budget bills. When a budget bill is not approved by January the 1st, as happened as recently as 2012, 2017 and 2018, the previous financial year’s budget is automatically extended until the new one is approved.

Legislative performance in both parliaments

Overview of legislative performance

As explained above, Portugal has two main legislative bodies: parliament and government, each with specific procedures to approve laws and decrees-law, respectively. However, the executive is responsible for most of the approved bills. In Portugal, individual Members can introduce draft bills, but, traditionally, few of these actually pass. However, recent political ­circumstances have been reversing this pattern, with the opposition getting their bills approved on a much larger scale, as shown below. ­Moreover, not only can government approve decrees-law, it can also present bills to ­parliament. ­Table 10.1 shows that government bills have a much higher likelihood to be

Table 10.1  Number of bills presented and approved in the 12th legislature (2015–2018), Portugal

Presented Approved

Proposed by MPs or PGs 974 283 Proposed by government 143   91 Total amount of approved bills 262

Source: Parliament database Note: The total number of approved bills is smaller than the total amount of draft laws passed because sometimes the final text of the bill incorporates two or more draft bills.

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  173

approved: while only 13 per cent of the bills presented by MPs/PGs were approved, 61 per cent of government bills became law. In Spain, the predominance of government’s legislative initiative is particularly patent. This is clear when it comes to the Budget, which takes precedence over the other business of Congress, as seen above. The executive also has several tools to enforce its legislative priority role:

• As compared to opposition bills, government bills must not go through the initial consideration debate by the Plenary of the Congress. • Government can declare or request the urgent procedure, not only in relation to its initiatives, but also in relation to non-government bills and in any stage of the procedure. • Government can request that the Houses meet in extraordinary sittings, also to consider legislative initiatives and in any of the stages of the procedure. • Government can oppose the consideration of any non-governmental bill or amendment which is considered as contrary to a currently valid legislative delegation.

The government’s power to oppose the consideration of non-government bills was hardly used when it had the support of an absolute majority. This was because, on the one hand, the executive almost totally controlled legislative initiative and, on the other, there was no need to resort to vetoing in order to avoid the consideration of non-government bills as the majority of the Chamber voted directly against their consideration. During the current 12th legislative term (2016–current), where the government does not have absolute majority, it has made a much more intensive use of its vetoing power. Successive Governments have showed their disagreement with non-government bills as follows:

• 1st Legislature (1979–1982): 23 • 2nd Legislature (1982–1986): 22 • 9th Legislature (2008–2011): 23 • 12th Legislature (2016–2018): 65

This shows that during the current legislature the Government has exponentially increased its use of this constitutional power, thus turning it into an obstructionism technique to hinder legislative initiative stemming from bodies other than the Government. Despite the latter, on some occasions the Government’s disagreement has not been accepted by the majority of the Bureau of the Congress of the Deputies, which has led the Government to raise two constitutional conflicts on competences against the relevant agreements adopted by the Bureau of the Congress.

174  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

Laws vs decrees-law

We now turn to an analysis of legislative outputs, focusing here on the main types: laws and decrees-law. We examine the volume presented during the democratic period in Portugal, from 1976 to the end of 2017. Table 10.2 shows the volume of the legislative production during the first 20 years of democracy, 1976–1996. As Table 10.2 shows, the government is, since 1976, the institution that legislates the most (87.20 per cent of decrees-law versus 12.80 per cent of laws), with a very high number of decrees-law approved in 1979 (707). Although in 1996, the number of decrees-law dropped to its lowest number of the first 20 years. The lowest number of laws enacted by the AR was 35 in 1992, the year with the lowest volume of legislation overall. Inversely, 1985 was the year with the highest number of laws approved by Parliament. ­Table 10.3 lists the volume of legislation for the subsequent 20 years. Between 1997 and 2017 the overall number of legislative acts decreased from 11,703 (1976–1996) to 8,136 (1997–2017), mainly due to the number of decrees-law enacted during this period. In fact, after 2011, the percentage of decrees-law started to decrease, falling from around 70 per cent/80 per cent

Table 10.2  Legislative Production in Portugal’s first 20 years of democracy (1976–1996)

Total Laws Decrees-Law

N % N % N %

1976 586 100 11 1.88 575 98.12 1977 753 100 95 12.62 658 87.38 1978 564 100 78 13.83 486 86.17 1979 789 100 82 10.40 707 89.61 1980 700 100 49 7 651 93 1981 447 100 53 11.86 394 88.15 1982 587 100 36 6.14 551 93.87 1983 551 100 43 7.81 508 92.20 1984 544 100 75 13.79 469 86.22 1985 739 100 148 20.03 591 79.98 1986 590 100 50 8.48 540 91.53 1987 491 100 45 9.17 446 90.84 1988 665 100 116 17.45 549 82.56 1989 581 100 102 17.56 479 82.45 1990 499 100 67 13.43 432 86.58 1991 586 100 116 19.80 470 80.21 1992 351 100 35 9.98 316 90.03 1993 529 100 98 18.53 431 81.48 1994 370 100 42 11.36 328 88.65 1995 443 100 96 21.67 347 78.33 1996 338 100 61 18.05 277 81.96 Total 11,703 100 1498 12.80 10,205 87.20

Source: Portuguese Legislation Observatory

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  175

of the total of legislative acts to less than 60 per cent in 2017. The only exception was 2012, when decrees-law represented 79.61 per cent of all legislation, which could be explained by a new government taking office in mid-2011, which introduced a Better Regulation policy programme. This had

three main goals mainly regarding governmental laws: i) to reduce the number of laws and simplify the legal framework, ii) to improve the access to and the transparency of laws and regulations and iii) to enhance the enforcement and execution of laws and regulation” (Silveira 2016: 83)

In 2016, 98 decrees-law were approved – the lowest number of decrees-law enacted since 1976 – together with 47 laws. These numbers could also be related to a governmental programme – Simplex +,1 which aimed also to reduce approved legislation by the government. However, in 2017, the number of both laws and decrees-law increased. In Spain, the legislative production in its first 20 years (1978–1998) was as listed in Table 10.4.

Table 10.3  Legislative production in Portugal’s last 20 years of democracy (1997–2017)

Total Laws Decrees-Law

N % N % N %

1997 540 100 138 25.56 402 74.45 1998 550 100 93 16.91 457 83.09 1999 795 100 181 22.77 614 77.24 2000 424 100 46 10.85 378 89.15 2001 506 100 129 25.50 377 74.51 2002 374 100 40 10.70 334 89.31 2003 457 100 115 25.17 342 74.84 2004 320 100 63 19.69 257 80.32 2005 313 100 69 22.05 244 77.96 2006 322 100 65 20.19 257 79.82 2007 499 100 75 15.03 424 84.97 2008 332 100 73 21.99 259 78.02 2009 458 100 125 27.30 333 72.71 2010 227 100 63 27.76 164 72.25 2011 207 100 70 33.82 137 66.19 2012 353 100 72 20.40 281 79.61 2013 270 100 89 32.97 181 67.04 2014 297 100 95 31.99 202 68.02 2015 448 100 179 39.96 269 60.05 2016 145 100 47 32.42 98 67.59 2017 299 100 122 40.81 177 59.20 Total 8,136 100 1949 23.96 6,187 76.05

Source: Portuguese Legislation Observatory

176  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

In Spain the parliament is the body that produces the highest number of bills (77.75 per cent laws against 22.25 per cent decrees-law). As Table 10.5 shows, over the last 19 years, the production of legislation decreased, namely the number of laws enacted, but also the number of decrees-law. In comparison with Portugal, Spain has a lower legislative production. In 2017, Spain adopted for the first time an Annual Regulatory Plan that establishes a schedule for the enactment of new regulations, aiming to rationalize and reduce legislation, stabilizing the legislative framework and reducing its complexity. However, it is still too early to see results.

Proposals initiated and proposals passed in parliament

Despite some fluctuations, explained by the political context, the number of laws approved in the Portuguese Parliament is relatively constant over the years, as shown in Table 10.6. However, recent years (2014–2017), especially the last year, show an increase of approved laws, which demonstrates the need to take measures to improve legislative effectiveness and to ensure the stability of the legal framework. In Spain, the situation is not very different – as Table 10.7 shows.

Table 10.4  Legislative production in Spain’s first 20 years of democracy (1978–1998)

Total Laws Decrees-Law

N % N % N %

1978 141 100 91 64.54 50 35.46 1979 71 100 49 69.01 22 30.99 1980 112 100 96 85.71 16 14.29 1981 77 100 58 75.32 19 24.68 1982 92 100 66 71.74 26 28.26 1983 69 100 60 86.96 9 13.04 1984 78 100 63 80.77 15 19.23 1985 73 100 65 89.04 8 10.96 1986 32 100 29 90.63 3 9.38 1987 48 100 41 85.42 7 14.58 1988 58 100 51 87.93 7 12.07 1989 30 100 23 76.67 7 23.33 1990 38 100 32 84.21 6 15.79 1991 49 100 44 89.80 5 10.20 1992 55 100 49 89.09 6 10.91 1993 45 100 23 51.11 22 48.89 1994 76 100 63 82.89 13 17.11 1995 72 100 60 83.33 12 16.67 1996 36 100 19 52.78 17 47.22 1997 101 100 72 71.29 29 28.71 1998 81 100 61 75.31 20 24.69 Total 1,434 100 1,115 77.75 319 22.25

Source: Boletín Oficial del Estado (https://www.boe.es/)

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  177

In Portugal, the average time to approve a law is extremely reduced and insufficient to guaranty the quality of the law and, namely, to hear all the relevant stakeholders and to use tools such as ex ante impact assessment and broad consultations. In fact, as Figure 10.1 shows, the average time to approve bills proposed by MPs or PGs is only of around 200 days. If we consider the bills presented by government to parliament the situation is even more limited: an average of 100 days to approve a bill. There is no available data for Spain concerning this issue, but the fact that this is a bicameral parliament generally entails more time for legislative procedures.

Parliamentary appreciation of government’ laws in Portugal

In Portugal, it is also important to consider another legislative tool: parliamentary appreciations. Parliamentary appreciations are a mechanism of political scrutiny by parliament of decrees-law. The parliamentary appreciation initiative can be triggered by a minimum of ten deputies, within 30 days after the publication of the decree-law. The effect of the parliamentary appreciation could be the amendment or the ending of validity of the decree- law, with this act being suspended until the publication of the law that

Table 10.5  Legislative production in Spain’s last 19 years of democracy (1999–2017)

Total Laws Decrees-Law

N % N % N %

1999 92 100 70 76.09 22 23.91 2000 33 100 23 69.70 10 30.30 2001 49 100 33 67.35 16 32.65 2002 73 100 63 86.30 10 13.70 2003 89 100 82 92.13 7 7.87 2004 18 100 7 38.89 11 61.11 2005 52 100 36 69.23 16 30.77 2006 65 100 52 80.00 13 20.00 2007 83 100 72 86.75 11 13.25 2008 16 100 6 37.50 10 62.50 2009 46 100 32 69.57 14 30.43 2010 67 100 53 79.10 14 20.90 2011 70 100 50 71.43 20 28.57 2012 54 100 25 46.30 29 53.70 2013 53 100 36 67.92 17 32.08 2014 61 100 44 72.13 17 27.87 2015 76 100 64 84.21 12 15.79 2016 9 100 2 22.22 7 77.78 2017 34 100 13 38.24 21 61.76 Total 1,040 100 763 73.37 277 26.63

Source: Boletín Oficial del Estado (https://www.boe.es/)

178  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

amends it. The possibility to eliminate legislative acts of the government highlights the primacy of parliament concerning legislative competences and it is a tool without parallel in other constitutional frameworks.

Table 10.6  Proposals initiated and passed in the Portuguese Parliament (1976–2017)

Proposals initiated Proposals passed Laws approved Proposed by government Proposed by parliament (MPs/PGs)

Proposed by government Proposed by parliament (MPs/PGs)

1976 21 24 14 11 25 1977 95 59 19 16 35 1978 68 72 2 15 17 1979 58 182 – 30 30 1980 91 296 5 2 7 1981 58 183 4 13 17 1982 67 113 7 6 13 1983 50 187 45 15 60 1984 29 161 17 62 79 1985 36 300 20 164 184 1986 39 233 27 57 84 1987 26 265 21 107 128 1988 49 176 45 85 130 1989 41 136 38 67 105 1990 39 203 39 65 104 1991 31 164 25 45 70 1992 28 206 27 69 96 1993 38 122 36 51 87 1994 26 126 24 29 53 1995 22 180 21 71 102 1996 53 202 45 114 159 1997 82 190 74 101 175 1998 63 158 53 53 106 1999 68 151 47 71 118 2000 43 280 35 120 155 2001 47 203 26 54 80 2002 33 190 32 53 85 2003 64 211 62 77 139 2004 52 150 28 46 74 2005 43 196 42 73 115 2006 56 144 54 44 98 2007 55 103 54 45 99 2008 57 192 57 31 88 2009 51 399 47 71 118 2010 39 384 34 77 111 2011 46 270 33 49 82 2012 74 197 74 35 109 2013 55 160 55 31 86 2014 74 263 74 63 137 2015 77 390 74 106 180 2016 29 278 26 98 124 2017 53 355 44 96 140

Source: Parliament database

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  179

Nevertheless, as Table 10.8 demonstrates, the parliamentary appreciation is not a tool used by parliament as often as we might think. Since 1997, together with the constitutional amendment, 645 initiatives of

Table 10.7  Proposals initiated and passed in the Spanish Parliament (1978–2017)

Proposals initiated Proposals passed Laws approved

Proposed by government

Proposed by parliament (PGs)

Proposed by government

Proposed by parliament (PGs)

Organic law Law Total

1978 145 47 86 7 – 91 91 1979 134 65 43 2 4 45 49 1980 151 73 73 15 13 83 96 1981 160 73 52 5 8 50 58 1982 148 66 68 6 13 53 66 1983 96 60 54 2 14 46 60 1984 83 34 53 7 10 53 63 1985 93 27 58 4 14 51 65 1986 68 46 27 1 4 25 29 1987 51 50 31 1 7 34 41 1988 34 33 40 5 7 44 51 1989 23 34 32 3 3 20 23 1990 44 54 19 3 1 31 32 1991 31 26 36 6 13 31 44 1992 46 53 38 7 10 39 49 1993 47 62 19 2 – 23 23 1994 51 39 43 2 20 43 63 1995 46 59 50 12 16 44 60 1996 25 61 17 3 5 14 19 1997 74 59 53 7 6 66 72 1998 57 113 42 11 11 50 61 1999 36 67 60 9 15 55 70 2000 28 86 18 2 9 14 23 2001 37 78 30 1 7 26 33 2002 62 100 56 6 10 53 63 2003 48 58 74 8 20 62 82 2004 17 129 11 – 3 4 7 2005 55 54 30 6 6 30 36 2006 49 33 38 5 8 44 52 2007 31 18 55 5 16 56 72 2008 19 126 18 2 2 4 6 2009 37 71 24 1 3 29 32 2010 48 68 48 6 9 44 53 2011 43 57 47 10 12 38 50 2012 33 57 16 – 8 17 25 2013 41 47 31 1 9 27 36 2014 53 49 43 1 8 36 44 2015 36 34 70 4 16 48 64 2016 4 92 – 2 2 – 2 2017 11 105 5 4 1 12 13

Source: Regulatory Production in Spain in 2017 – Confederation of Employers and Industries of Spain, 2018

180  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

parliamentary appreciations of government decrees-law were presented. Only 16.12 per cent of these initiatives led to a change of a law. When we consider other national parliaments, such as the Spanish one, we understand that this tool is quite unusual, being strange to parliaments where there is a clear predominance of the government’s legislative initiative, as is the case in Spain where, as we have seen, government has the power to oppose the consideration of non-government bills.

Transparency, citizens’ accessibility and how ICT can enhance it

E-participation in law-making process has recently assumed growing importance in modern parliaments, attempting to make them more accountable. This is achieved by providing information about parliamentary activity on the website together with a range of mechanisms, which aim at creating opportunities for citizens to participate and increase levels of interactivity. In the Portuguese parliament, its President created the Digital Parliament Working Group in 2016 to consider how technology and web

0

50

100

150

200

Average Days

XII LG-1a SL

XII LG-2a SL

XII LG-3a SL

XII LG-4a SL

XIII LG-1aSL

XIII LG-2aSL

Draft Bills Presented by MPs/PPGs/groups of citizens Draft Bills Presented by the Government or the Autonomous Regions

Figure 10.1  Average time to approve laws in the Portuguese Parliament. Source: Parliament database.

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  181

communications could enhance parliamentary work, and its perception by citizens. The Digital Parliament Working Group reported in 2018, enacting thereafter a number of important changes. One of its outputs was the reformulation of the Parliamentary website and of the TV Channel, as key tools to open parliamentary procedures to citizens. The Group led a thoroughgoing reform, including a decision supporting the presence of the AR in several social media networks. In March 2018, the Portuguese Parliament launched a new website, more citizen focused, with a more user-friendly layout, more contents, a different structure and a strong emphasis on open data. One of the innovations is the availability of digital platforms that allow citizens to collect signatures and present petitions, citizens’ legislative initiatives and referendum initiatives. Citizens may also present suggestions to parliamentary activity and have the possibility of subscribing alerts if they wish to follow the development of specific content. In Spain, even if it seems as if the crisis suffered by the principle of representation has been overcome, there are still demands of greater transparency and citizen involvement, which, together with the tools made available by the new technologies have no doubt influenced parliamentary activity. On the one hand, the number of hearings and appearances of experts and affected parties during the consideration of legislative initiatives

Table 10.8  Parliamentary Appreciations in Portugal (1997–2017)

Total of parliamentary appreciation of government’ laws Laws amended by parliamentary appreciations

1997 4 1 1998 29 10 1999 50 20 2000 23 20 2001 25 6 2002 42 – 2003 26 1 2004 17 3 2005 12 – 2006 26 – 2007 23 1 2008 38 7 2009 52 6 2010 51 12 2011 30 – 2012 37 1 2013 28 3 2014 58 1 2015 32 2 2016 17 8 2017 25 2 Total 645 104

182  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

has increased. Such hearings are not mandatory according to the parliament’s Rules of Procedure, but they must be agreed by the committees entrusted with the relevant legislative initiative. Their goal is to inform parliamentarians and hear the views of those involved in the respective policy being considered, and for this reason they are held after the debate on the whole in the Plenary once the initiative has been conveyed to the relevant committee and before the deadline to table amendments to sections thereof has expired. These hearings add up to those held in the sub committees and study committees, thus generating agreements and making citizen involvement possible. On the other hand, thanks to new technologies these hearings have sometimes taken place in videoconference format. Publicity of parliamentary activity is channelled through different paths: as in Portugal, the Spanish parliament has a Parliament TV channel, which is produced by the Congress of Deputies. This is a TV channel broadcast by satellite, cable and internet. Its programs are based on the live and pre-­ recorded broadcasting of the Plenary and Committee sittings, as well as informational programs produced in-house. The Congress’s web page also enables the public to follow live all parliamentary sittings held each day in the Chamber. Likewise, the Congress is actively present in several social media networks and has its own profile in Twitter, YouTube, Instagram and Facebook. The Senate is also present on Twitter, YouTube and Instagram. On the other hand, both the Congress and the Senate have incorporated a “Transparency Portal” into their websites, providing economic, budgetary and contractual information, as well as on the institution and its organization. This includes information on the parliamentarians’ activities and assets, how to contact them and, in some cases, their diary activities. Citizens may, in turn, request information through the Portal regarding the ­Chambers’ administrative activity. Parliament’s openness is thus undeniable, although its impact on the exercise of its classic functions has not been so remarkable. The said functions are now conducted with greater publicity, but in the same way as before. In order to simplify and improve legislation and also to motivate the participation of citizens and encourage their interest in the legislative process, the Portuguese Parliament also created, in the previous legislature (2011–2015), a Parliamentary Working Group to Consolidate Legislation. This Group led to making available an online form on the home page of parliament’s website inviting citizens to send suggestions to the AR for the simplification and/or improvement of laws. The Working Group held public hearings with university research centres, legal practitioners, associations representing sectorial interests and the general public, in order to increase the dialogue with the community and to receive their contributions in respect of areas where the quality of the law could be improved.

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  183

Controversies and problems for parliaments and their legislative activity

However, when we look at the Portuguese and the Spanish parliaments, we realize reality is quite different and there is still a long way to go. For instance, in the 11th legislative term (2011–2015), the Spanish Parliament coexisted with a caretaker government. If until then parliamentary activity had not started until after the investiture debate for the Government, on this occasion the Congress, decided to perform the functions that it understood were incumbent upon it as Parliament duly established, according to its powers, although with the limitations entailed by the coexistence with a caretaker government. Therefore, committees were set up, non-legislative proposals (resolution proposals with non – legislative content) were discussed in the Plenary, as well as non-government bills tabled by the Chamber’s PGs. Additionally, the 2015 report by the Ombudsman was examined, the debate on the whole of the proposal for the reform of the Statute of Devolution of an Autonomous Region was discussed and a Royal Decree was ratified. However, the Government’s refusal to be subjected to the Chamber’s oversight, since it considered that there was no relationship of confidence between an acting Government and the Congress of Deputies, together with its refusal to appear before the Chamber beyond what it considered could be required from a caretaker Government, resulted in all PGs, except the Government’s, tabling a proposal to raise a conflict of competences before the Constitutional Court, in the understanding that the Government’s refusal had prevented the Congress from performing the oversight function enshrined in the Constitution, thus defying, among other provisions, article 66 of the Spanish Constitution. This proposal was adopted in the plenary sitting held on April 6, 2016, and thus the conflict of competences was raised before the Constitutional Court, no sentence having being issued to date. Majorities supporting one or another initiative fluctuate, so that the Executive’s implementation of its legislative agenda is not guaranteed, nor that of the draft Budget bill or any other, to the point that a Royal Decree was not ratified and therefore repealed, something that had only happened during the Constituent Legislative Term with Royal Decree 1/1979, of January 8, whereby the essentially necessary time for the work of the Barracks Confinement Central Board (Journal of Sittings of the Plenary of the Congress of Deputies, February 6, 1979) was extended, and during the 8th legislative term with Decree-Law 1/2006, of January 20, modifying tax rates of tobacco products. On the other hand, as we pointed out before, the Government has made an intensive use of its vetoing power regarding non-governmental legislative initiatives. This situation calls for constant negotiation and to trying to reach agreements on the different fields, agreements to cement legislative policy.

184  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

To this end, during the current legislative term several study ­committees and sub committees have been set up, with a view to their drafting reports after hearing experts and stakeholders and analysing the documentation conveyed by competent bodies and institutions, so that they can be used for new regulations. However, to date only the report by the Sub Committee on a State Pact regarding Gender Violence has obtained the support of a large majority of the Chamber, whilst the Sub Committee for the Study and Definition of a National Justice Strategy has concluded its works without drafting a report, and the Sub Committee for the State Social and Political Pact for Education has come to standstill, having most of the groups decided to stop attending its meetings due to disagreements on its evolution, which has resulted in the lack of the necessary quorum to adopt any agreement. While it is true that during this minority Government period the Parliament’s legislative activity has increased, the Government’s obstructionism through its vetoing power has likewise increased. And although this situation has led to the establishment of deliberation bodies to attain consensus, the old parliamentary obstructionism techniques have been revived in those cases when their work did not obtain the necessary agreement. This situation is different from that of prior periods, when, despite the fact that the Government was supported by a large parliamentary majority, thanks to which it may have enforced its own initiatives, it decided on some occasions to promote an initiative stemming from the Chamber itself with the greatest consensus possible, so that this initiative was endorsed by a forced legitimation. That was indeed the case with the two reforms of the Constitution of 1978 adopted to date: the proposal for a constitutional reform of article 13.2, tabled jointly by the Socialist, Popular, Catalan (CiU) Izquierda Unida-Iniciativa per Catalunya, CDS, Basque (PNV) and Mixed Groups; and the proposal for the constitutional reform of article 135, tabled jointly by the two majority groups in the Congress, Socialist and Popular, reform published in the BOE number 233, of September 27, 2011. In Portugal, an ad hoc committee, created in parliament in April of 2016 to enhance transparency in public life and, therefore, to fight the lack of trust crisis, has not been able, until now, to reach an agreement to regulate lobbying practices, to create a Code of Conduct for Members or to modify the register of conflict of interests of Members and public office holders. This demonstrates the difficulties in reaching consensus, or even simple ­majorities, in these areas.

Conclusion

Despite the growing importance of the scrutiny function in parliaments and of the emergence of new key players contributing to the legal framework (UE, regulatory authorities, local and regional authorities), the

The legislative role of Iberian parliaments  185

legislative function is still the main competence of the Spanish and of the Portuguese parliaments and must be considered as a priority. Their influence on the legislative process is shown both in their ability to initiate legislation and to propose amendments to bills introduced, particularly in the case of Portugal. The number of approved bills in both parliaments illustrates this, although better lawmaking remains a goal to be achieved. Both parliaments had similar political situations, with minority governments forced to have negotiations in parliament and increasing this institution’s power. The Spanish and the Portuguese Parliaments are decisive for negotiating legislative coalitions and policies. The other side of this coin is that fragmentation of legislative power is reflected in the quality of laws, because they often result from difficult compromises and the text is always compromised to reach to an agreement. It also contributes to the lack of unity and coherence of the legal system. Despite having a bicameral parliament, the Spanish situation is not so different from the Portuguese one, since the Cortes Generales are not a real federal parliament and the Senate has limited powers concerning legislative policy. Still, one significant difference between the two parliaments is the dominance in Spain of government bills in the parliamentary agenda and the power of government to veto parliamentary bills, which has no equivalent in Portugal. In fact, in the Portuguese Parliament, we may have exactly the opposite: parliament has the power to call government’s decrees-law back to parliament to change them or to suspend their enforcement. Disaffection towards institutionalized political class has resulted paradoxically in a greater political involvement and a revival of the interest in politics, which brought new forces into parliament thus integrating external players. Social media, in turn, are now used for direct follow-up of parliamentary players. ICT represents opportunity and problems for both parliaments: it allows citizens engagement but, at the same time, it gives rise to movements of rejection of parliaments and denial of their representative legitimacy. It can also lead to important laws being blocked and to the ­opposite situation: a passage of laws motivated by private interests. On the other hand, the pressure from social media may lead to some laws being passed outside the conventional participation procedures and the public parliamentary debate. Thus, new technologies have irreversibly altered the way politics is conducted, as well as the relationship between parliamentarians and citizens, but they have not replaced representative democracy. So far, new technologies have not increased citizens’ involvement in the Spanish legislative procedure, although they have contributed to its publicity and transparency. However, in the Portuguese parliamentary lawmaking, citizens have a stronger and more important role, with several tools to participate in the legislative process. Both parliaments have regained a central role in the political system, but there is a long path ahead in both parliaments to achieve better regulation.

186  Cláudia Ribeiro et al.

Note

1 Available at www.simplex.gov.pt/app/files/8926586c0ad2c9a5e0cc2bd56e30987f. pdf.

References

García-Escudero, Piedad. 2000. La Iniciativa Legislativa del Gobierno. Edited by Centro de Estudios Políticos y Constitucionales. García-Pelayo, Manuel. 1977. Las Transformaciones del Estado Contemporáneo.

­Edited by Alianza. Moreno Ara, José Antonio. 2012. “Comentarios al artículo 133”. In Comentarios al Reglamento del Congreso de los Diputados. Edited by Congreso de los Diputados. Silveira, João Tiago. 2016. “Portuguese Trends on Better Regulation”. Journal of Legislative Evaluation. 10–1: 75–102.

Introduction

Together with representation, accountability is a building block of democracy. Regular elections are instruments for citizens to hold their representatives accountable (Manin 1997). In parliamentary democracies, legislatures are an electoral chamber of the executive (Cox 1987). In return, legislatures have a constellation of mechanisms to keep tabs on the executive, such as parliamentary questions, interpellations, inquiry committees and so forth. These mechanisms help to curb informational asymmetries between the parliament and public opinion, on the one hand, and the executive, on the other hand. Parliamentary accountability implies that the executive explains and justifies its actions and policy decisions to the parliament. If the policy-­ making outputs of the executive are not aligned with the median preferences of the legislature, the latter can sanction the executive by using, for example, no-confidence voting, an institutional resort designed to dismiss the executive. Portuguese and Spanish parliaments share similitudes not only in their institutional design but also in their historical development. However, the two countries also have differences that are worth examining. Does ­Portugal have a different model of parliamentary accountability because of its semi-presidential model? What are the most relevant accountability institutions in each country? To what extent has the institutional structure changed since the inception of democracy in the 1970s? Does bicameralism make a difference in the Spanish case? Over the past decades, principal-agent approaches have been successfully used to analyse institutions in liberal democracies. A chain of delegation is created when voters elect institutional agents such as the president or the parliament. In parliamentary systems, a second step in the chain of delegation is set up when a prime minister and its cabinet is invested as the agent of the chamber. In reverse, a chain of responsibility in a parliamentary democracy goes from an agent (the executive) to its principal (parliament) as a logical consequence of the delegation of power. This chain of responsibility

11 Parliamentary accountability

Manuel Sánchez de Dios

188  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

is complemented by another that goes from the parliament (the majority) to the voters (Strøm 2000). In delegation models, agency loss is a consequence of diverging preferences between the parliament and the executive. Furthermore, asymmetric information bolsters agency loss insofar as the executive enjoys access to privileged information sources. Typically, the cabinet tries to maximise its preferences at the expense of the parliament’s, where the median position also encompasses opposition parties. Consequently, in parliamentary government, there is a conflict of interest between the two branches – that is, between the cabinet and the opposition. Furthermore, there is a competitive relationship between the executive and its supporting party/parties (the majority). Opposition parties use parliamentary accountability procedures to fight asymmetries of information, i.e., hidden information or hidden action. Monitoring and reporting requirements are some of the primary institutional mechanisms that principals use to keep tabs on their agents. There are three ways to gain information about the agent’s action: direct monitoring, attending what the agent says about his activities and attending a third-party testimony about agent action (McCubbins and Schwartz 1984). In parliamentary democracies, select committees and ad hoc inquiry committees help principals in their direct monitoring actions. Parliamentary questions and hearings of government members and civil servants are examples of tools designed to obtain direct information from the agent. Citizens and interest groups act as fire-alarms if agents dissent from the principal’s preferences. Ombudsman is also useful fire-alarms in fighting delegation perils. In monitoring the executive, opposition parties must decide, first, which accountability mechanism fits better their preferences regarding the outcomes they want to reach. That is, there is a strategic decision to take by opposition parties that should consider if their goal is to compete directly with the executive and the majority, or to cooperate with the government in order to modify the content of policies. For example, an oral question on the floor opens a general debate that nowadays, thanks to technology, can be seen by voters on TV or in social networks. Consequently, an oral question is a good way to criticise the government actions and to show to the public opinion a competitive attitude on the part of opposition parties. An example is the Prime Minister’s Question Time in the UK that is considered an adversarial party battle (Moran 2005). In a similar vein, a debate of no-confidence vote gives the opposition the opportunity to present an alternative programme under a competitive strategy trying to reach the public opinion and, if possible, to topple the government. On the contrary, if the strategy of an opposition party is to give orientation or indirrizzo to the government, it can propose a temporary committee about policy with the aim of producing a report that evaluates policy and can help the government to make reforms. This is a typical

Parliamentary accountability  189

mechanism of the National Assembly of France (Chevillier-Hiver 2000). Alternatively, the parliament can propose a resolution in a standing committee to give orientation to the executive, as usually happens in the Nordic countries (Damgaard 1992; Raunio and Wiberg 2003). In this chapter, we take into consideration how opposition acts under different forms of party government: majority, minority and coalitions. The success of an oppositional strategy is measured according to the theory of retrospective vote (Fiorina 1981) regarding support to a government and its majority in elections. It is also relevant to evaluate the erosion of a minority or coalition government when they are forced to call for early elections, and, finally, the most important indicator is alternation in government.

Parliamentary accountability in Portugal

The Portuguese Assembleia da República (AR) works in a semi-presidential context, based on a triangular relationship between the President, the Cabinet and the Assembly (Leston-Bandeira 2002; Costa Lobo 2012 ­Leston-Bandeira and Fernandes 2015). As a consequence of its institutionalisation, since the early 2000s, the relevance of the Portuguese parliament changed considerably. Today, the AR is a strong institution, with full autonomy and a pivotal position in the political system insofar as discussion and deliberations have become its main activity (Leston-Bandeira and Freire 2005). The Assembly has the competence to scrutinise the actions of the ­Government and public administration. MPs have the rights to question the Government, to request and receive any information or document, to form committees of inquiry and to vote on motions of confidence in the Government. Government members shall attend the Assembly sittings specially convened for scrutiny. If summoned, they are also obliged to appear before parliamentary committees, although they may also ask to participate in committee proceedings at their own volition. Besides, Government members have the right to attend and speak during plenary sessions of the ­Assembly. In what follows, we describe accountability mechanisms in detail in Portugal. Parliamentary written questions are an essential oversight instrument in legislatures. In the Portuguese case, there are two types of written questions. First, questions to the government (perguntas ao Governo) are meant to keep tabs on the executive. Their relevance increased after the 2005–2009 parliament, during which MPs tabled 6.617 questions, of which 75 per cent were answered. Second, questions to public administration (requerimentos) are meant to exert oversight on the work of public servants. Starting in the 1990s, they address primarily technical and administrative matters to which the government is obliged to answer within 30 days. These are cheap and easy mechanisms to obtain information. However, the public administration tends to have low responsiveness – answers late and in only 50 per cent

190  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

of the cases. Around 70 per cent are directed to the central administration and the rest to the local government. Parliamentary questions have been increasingly used since 1987. To be sure, the fact that MPs can table as many questions as they wish makes this a costless and easy instrument to use. Furthermore, because they are published online on the parliament’s website, parliamentary questions help MPs to advertise their productivity. Recent work suggests that, towards the end of the legislative term, MPs increase the number of parliamentary questions to help them obtain information to use in the electoral campaign (­Fernandes et al. 2018; Fernandes et al. 2019). The 1985 reform of the AR implemented Question Time as an accountability tool. However, oral questions to the government were usually described by MPs as being monotonous and uninteresting due to their lack of frequency and flexibility (Vitorino 1988; Leston-Bandeira and Freire 2005). The 2007 reform heightened the importance of Question Time (Filipe 2009). The Prime-Minister must stand before the Plenary fortnightly. Importantly, opposition parties have agenda-setting powers during Question Time, as well as the prerogative to open the debate. Ministers must go to the floor to answer questions at least once per legislative term. Table 11.1 shows the number of questions answered by the Prime Minister to be relevant, while minister’s answers are low and insignificant.

Table 11.1  Parliamentary accountability in Portugal (2011–2015)

Procedure N Procedure N

PRIME MINISTER INTERVENTIONS WRITTEN QUESTIONS   Oral questions 72   Requested 12,204   Vote of Censure debated 6   Answered 9,250   Investiture 1 ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTS   Confidence vote 1   Requested 11,998   State of the nation 4   Answered 4,883 DEBATES ON THE FLOOR PARTY DECLARATIONS   Oral questions 5   Debated 607   Government declarations 7   Proposed by majority 221   Actual 30 RESOLUTIONS   Urgent 18   Proposed 1,586   Thematic 24   Approved 483 INTERPELLATIONS 22 PROTEST VOTES 5 INQUIRY COMMITTEES PETITIONS   Proposed 9   Proposed 127   Created 7   Debated 52 TEMPORARY COMMITTEES 3 HEARINGS IN COMMITTEE 3,777

Source: www.parlamento.pt

Parliamentary accountability  191

Interpellations (interpelações ao Governo) have been considered as the principal scrutinising mechanism of the AR. They consist of a broad debate on the general programme of government or sectorial policy issues, drawing high media attention. Unlike Question Time, the content of this debate is not flexible, that is, it is not possible to ask questions on unexpected topics. Each parliamentary party group is entitled only to two interpellations per legislative session. Due to their great public repercussion, motions are the most public and solemn mechanism of accountability. Importantly, all motions involve a relevant debate on the overall political responsibility of the government. In general, there are two types of motions: the vote of no-confidence (moção de censura) and the vote of confidence (moção de confiança). To rationalise the use of vote of no-confidence, parliamentary party groups do not have the right to present a second vote of no-­confidence in the same legislative term, if their first vote fails. Although the vote of no-­confidence is relatively frequent in the AR, only in 1987 was the use of this instrument consequential by toppling Cavaco Silva’s minority government. Furthermore, there is a third type of motion, specific to the debate on the government’s programme. As Leston-Bandeira and Fernandes (2015) show, the opposition has the opportunity to put forth a motion to stop the government from taking office by rejecting its programme. Since democratisation, this instrument has only been successfully used twice: in 1978, to reject a presidential-initiative government, and in 2015 to reject Passos Coelho’s ­minority coalition. There are also some other general debates on the floor that are becoming more and more relevant with time. Opposition parties can use them to keep tabs and criticise government policies. First, the annual debate on the state of the nation (Estado da Nação) wherein the Prime Minister has to answer questions. This debate must take place in one of the last meetings of the legislative session. Second, urgency debates and current debates that permit to discuss unexpected issues promptly. There are also thematic debates to consider on government policy. To hold the government accountable on current affairs, MPs can use PAOD (Periodo Antes da Ordem do Dia) debates – that is, a period at the start of each plenary session wherein parliamentary party groups and the executive can make political statements. Typically, opposition parties use this instrument to criticise the government. MPs also use this period to make protest votes to dissent from their parties, with the aim to voice local concerns from their constituents. To help combat moral hazard, the Portuguese parliament uses resolutions as an indirizzo procedure. In doing so, the AR “recommends” the government to take some decisions or to formulate a policy. Such a mechanism is designed for the legislature to relay its median position on a policy-issue to the government.

192  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

Next, we turn to committees as an accountability mechanism. The AR has 12 permanent committees, whose powers include the creation of sub-­ committees to deal with specific policy-areas (see Chapter 5). Committees have high importance in monitoring the government insofar as ministers must appear before committees at least four times per legislative session. Furthermore, committees can summon ministers, junior ministers, and civil servants for additional hearings. In addition to permanent committees, ad hoc committees – set up to conduct an inquiry into a specific subject – enjoy vast investigative powers. The accountability function of ad hoc committees raises two issues. On the one hand, these institutions have the power to define their task and to operate independently from the plenary. On the other hand, ad hoc committees are strongly criticised if the legislative majority uses them for political purposes. Ultimately, the counter-majoritarian nature of ad hoc committees of inquiry stems from the public debate they generate and the attention of their issues from the media (Vitorino 1988). Furthermore, the final report of the committee needs to be approved by a majority on the floor. Since 1993, committee hearings (audições and audiencias) have developed as a natural consequence of the general heightening of committee importance in the internal organisation of the chamber (Leston-Bandeira 2004). These hearings are a resource to obtain direct information from the government, the administration, interest groups, and even the citizenry.

Opposition strategies of Portuguese parties

Over the last decades, there has been a constant increase in parliamentary accountability in Portugal. Opposition parties have grown more and more active in their use of institutional prerogatives to keep tabs on the executive, in particular, in their use of written questions, question time and making indirizzo. For example, in the 1987–1991 legislature, there have been only 91 resolutions, against 1,586 in the 2011–2015 term. Table 11.2 shows the use of accountability instruments in Portugal depending on the type of government. In majority governments, opposition parties rely more on question time with the Prime-Minister, special debates on the floor. Furthermore, we can see that opposition parties have focused on showing policy alternatives as a way to confront the government. In the case of minority or coalition governments, written questions, committee hearings and resolutions emerge as the most relevant accountability strategies. Our data suggest a distinct behaviour of the left and right blocs. Indeed, when the Socialist Party is in opposition, the use vote of no-confidence and proposals to put forth ad hoc inquiry committees tend to increase. Furthermore, in those periods, these are a higher number of committee hearings as well as resolutions to give indirizzo to the government. We can conclude that the Socialists’ opposition strategy has been to polarise the political debate.

Table 11.2  Number of accountability procedures held per session (1985–2015)

Government Confidence Questions to PM General debates Debates with ministers

Government declarations Party declarations Majority declarations Proposals of resolutions

Hearings committee Inquiry committees Written questions

Majority 1 10.5 15.2 15 1.5 160 27 142 667 4.8 1,882 Minority 1.8 9 15 14.6 4.2 97 36 261 692 3.5 2,554 PS 0.9 9.5 14.9 16.8 3.1 120 22 215 642 2.6 2,653 PSD/CDS 2.1 9.3 10.3 15.5 3.4 105 46 247 729 4.9 1,974

Source: Based on data from www.parlamento.pt

194  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

Turning to the opposition strategy of the rightist parties, our data suggest that ministerial rate of answers to parliamentary written questions is higher. Debates with ministers are more frequent when the right is in the opposition. Consequently, the opposition strategy of the Social Democrats may be characterised as follows. On the one hand, parliamentary party groups and MPs look for precise information by written questions. On the other hand, they confront the government directly by debating its policies on the floor.

Parliamentary accountability in Spain

A distinctive feature of the Spanish Cortes Generales is that they are an asymmetrical bicameral parliament. Overall, the lower chamber, the Congreso, is much more critical than the Senado. Most of the legislative and policy-making powers are concentrated in the lower chamber. However, the upper-chamber has an active role in accountability processes. Similar to the lower chamber, in the Senate there is regular question time, there are written questions and demanding administrative reports. Furthermore, the Senate can make use of interpellations and approve motions on the floor. The committees of the Senate have similar resources to the Congreso. Ultimately, as Table 11.3 suggests, a fair assessment is that the amount of accountability procedures is similar in both chambers. Let us now turn to a detailed description of the functioning of accountability mechanisms in Spain. Parliamentary written questions are fundamental in the Spanish context if anything due to their large number. The number of questions has been growing steadily since the 1982–1986 parliament when 9,200 were tabled. To be sure, MPs do not face any constraints in the number or content of their questions. Political parties do not control how MPs use parliamentary question. Written questions offer two advantages. First, roughly 90 per cent of them obtains an answer. Second, answers are typically exact. In Spain, written questions must be answered in 20 days. If not, MPs have the right to ask them as oral questions in the committee arena. In recent years, administrative reports requesting information to central public administration have become an important accountability mechanism. By and large, such reports give more precise information than written questions insofar as they contain the technical details of the decision-­ making process, expunged of the political jargon and spin of written questions (Guerrero 2004). The high demand for administrative report has had a pernicious consequence: overwhelmed civil servants tend to devalue these requests because they do not have the resources to deliver comprehensive reports (Guerrero 2004). Question Time in Spain is a necessary procedure to fight information asymmetries, although it does not have a similar political impact than in Westminster parliaments. Every week, a total of 24 oral questions must be answered in

Parliamentary accountability  195

plenary. The Prime Minister must take, at least, three questions. Parties have the prerogative to make a number of questions that is commensurate to their size on the table. Small parties, though, are protected – ­regardless of their size, they have the right to ask one question.

Table 11.3  Parliamentary accountability in Spain (2011–2015)

CONGRESO DE LOS DIPUTADOS

Procedure N Procedure N

WRITTEN QUESTIONS Administrative reports   Requested 82,299   Requested 4,126   Answered 74,726   Answered 3,600

FLOOR COMMITTEE Government

declarations 4 ORAL QUESTION   Requested 3,662 Interpellation   Answered 566   Tabled 336 NON-LAW PROPOSITION   Debated 231   Tabled 3,921 Motion   Approved 639   Tabled 98 HEARINGS   Approved 68   Requested total 6,091   Reprobation tabled 8   Held total 2,639 Oral question   Requested Government 2,322   Tabled 1,440   Held Government 620   Answered 1,336 INQUIRY COMMITTEES   By Prime Minister 167   Requested 26 NON-LAW PROPOSITION   Created 0   Tabled 1,315 Temporary committees 1   Approved 80 Subcommittees 13 GOVERNMENT HEARINGS   Requested 163   Held 7

SENADO WRITTEN QUESTIONS Administrative reports   Requested 86,689   Requested 608   Answered 80,002   Answered 440

FLOOR COMMITTEE Oral question ORAL QUESTION   Tabled 1205   Tabled 2,745   Answered 1,140   Answered 1,061   By Prime Minister 55 MOTION INTERPELLATION   Tabled 702   Tabled 206   Approved 122   Voted 201 HEARINGS MOTION   Requested total 2,132   Requested 408   Held total 1,312   Approved 159   Government requested 440   Government held 420 SPECIAL COMMITTEES 5

Source: www.congreso.es; www.senado.es

196  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

Oral questions make up for a good accountability mechanism for opposition parties to influence public opinion (Capo Giol 2005). Parties view them as part of their vote-seeking strategies to build an electorally attractive profile, particularly given the role of TV and YouTube in relaying question time to average citizens. Oral questions in committees are an efficient mechanism to monitoring policies. Although they are numerically significant, their efficacy is limited since less than a half are answered. At least two hours a week are devoted to debate questions and interpellations and, on some occasions, the time spent is doubled. Questions can be answered by ministers, junior ministers, and public officials. Over the past few years, it is becoming more and more common to see high public officials answering questions. Interpellations are a traditional accountability mechanism in Spain. Each week, after question time, some interpellations are debated. A general debate ensues, which ends in a vote, thus making this an extremely efficient mechanism for opposition parties. Each party can table a limited number of interpellations per legislative term depending on its size. Non-law propositions on the floor (also called resolutions) are usually tabled after a government communication and are debated similarly as motions. There are also non-law propositions in committee. Non-law propositions play an essential role, and their use has been increasing steadily. Non-law propositions and motions are related to the Italian idea of indirizzo, which means influence in parliamentary terms. Indirizzo activity is very high when there is a minority government in Spain. These procedures are used to combat moral hazard because they frame and give structure to the executive action. Committee hearings can happen at the request of the House, the committee, or the executive. Usually, opposition parties request them for accountability purposes. Committee hearings are crucial due to the specialised nature of committees. Moreover, the fact that committees have both legislative and control capacities makes them a central mechanism for partisan coordination (Mattson and Strom 1995). In committees, opposition parties can ask questions to the executive, approve non-law propositions, and summon the presence of people. Ad hoc inquiry committees offer a powerful arena for accountability insofar as they can summon any citizen to provide input. Since 1994, they have been open to the media, which typically has consequences for way MPs engage in parliamentary business. That is, there is an inverse relationship between the openness of committees and the extent to which MPs and parties are willing to cooperate. In the Spanish case, inquiry committees are difficult to set up because of executive resistance. Indeed, observers note that rules of procedure are seemingly made to protect the executive (Flores Juberias 2003: 583). Consequently, they tend to exist in minority government situations, when there it is easier for the opposition to bargain with the

Parliamentary accountability  197

government in exchange for occasional support in policy-making. For all their difficulties, the political and media importance of inquiry committees is becoming more relevant. The use of vote of no-confidence and vote of confidence is infrequent in Spain. To be sure, the vote of no-confidence is rationalised according to the German model – that is, it involves a constructive notion insofar as the proposing party needs to adduce an alternative head of government. Together with the investiture vote, both institutions protect and promote the existence of minority government. A vote of no-confidence was approved in 2018. Another general debate in which Prime Minister participates is the one on the “state of the nation” introduced using communication of the government. It should be annual, but it is not always the case. The Congreso de los Diputados also debates the annual reports of the Ombudsman (Defensor del pueblo) and of the Audit Office (Tribunal de Cuentas) that, unlike Portugal, have a delegated power by the Cortes Generales to scrutinise administrative action.

Opposition strategies of Spanish parties

During the process of democratic consolidation, minority governments prevailed in Spain. Consequently, the parliament emerged as a debate arena, where parties bargained and exchanged benefits (Powell and Powell 2000). However, from 1982 through 1993, the PSOE majorities conduct to a loss in the centrality of parliament as well as a weakening in its ­policy-making powers and public recognition (Paniagua Soto 1997). Since 1993, minority governments prevailed again, heightening the political capacity and influence of the parliament. A distinctive feature of Spanish minority governments is the role played by small nationalist parties. The pivotal position of these parties determines the process of parliamentary accountability, in that their opposition strategy is more often cooperative than competitive. Similar to Portugal, accountability intensity has been increasing over time. Table 11.4 displays differences between majority and minority governments. In minority governments, there are higher levels of accountability. Specifically, there have been more motions and resolutions approved on the floor and in committees. As mentioned above, the creation of ad hoc inquiry committees is also more prevailing under minority governments. Table 11.4 further suggests the increasing relevance of indirizzo, giving orientation to these executives, in minority governments. The primary agents of the indirizzo are the small nationalist parties that, while supporting the government, develop a cooperative opposition strategy to obtain policy payoffs. In minority governments, written questions tend to have higher answer rates. Moreover, oral questions in committees tend to be more debated in committees than in majority governments, as do oral questions on the floor,

Table 11.4  Number of accountability procedures held per session, Spain (1982–2015)

Government Written questions Question time Hearings floor Interpellations Motions Resolutions floor Questions committee Resolutions committee Hearings committee GvHearings committee

Temporary committee

Majority 6,330 203   3 21 9.5   9 139 53 323 70 0.8 Minority 7,407 209   2 24 8.2 13.2 113 76 343 93 1.8 PSOE 5,943 155 66 21 5.4   7.2 100 33 288 44 0.8 PP 6,608 243 90 27 11.5 14.4 168 96 374 90 1.7

Source: Based on data from www.congreso.es

Parliamentary accountability  199

designed to show the opposition’s strategy to the public opinion. These indicators suggest that, by and large, minority governments are more subject to accountability. On the contrary, under majority governments, there is a decrease in all sorts of accountability procedures. The number of motions, resolutions on the floor and in committees is less than half of that of minority governments. In a nutshell, under majority governments, opposition parties look for precise, detailed, and specialised information to help them formulate policy alternatives. In the 1982–1986 and 2011–2015 legislative terms, Spain lived under ­majority governments. Over these two periods, the main opposition parties underwent massive internal crises, which hampered their capacity to make effective use of accountability mechanisms. To be sure, if the opposition is highly fragmented and polarised that curbs its capacity to hold the government accountable. Next, we turn to an analysis of the opposition strategy of rightist parties in Spain. To fight information asymmetries, rightist parties use motions, oral questions in committees and hearings on the floor. Furthermore, in the case of the three minority Socialist governments, indirizzo procedures are also relevant because of the activity of the small nationalist parties. The oppositional strategies of leftist parties have been characterised by a higher number of writing questions and hearings in committee. In particular, hearings of the executive members have been very numerous as well as temporary committees were also relevant. Opposition parties aimed mainly to fight information asymmetries using specialised arenas. Under rightwing minority governments, leftist opposition relied on numerous resolutions. The government’s dependence on the parliamentary support of small nationalist parties suggests that the opposition can influence government policies via indirizzo procedures. In a different vein, under rightist majority governments, leftist opposition turned to interpellations as a mechanism to display its disagreements publicly with the government, forging a competitive opposition strategy.

Conclusion

Overall, since democratisation, parliamentary accountability has grown steadily in Iberian legislatures. The Portuguese model of accountability is characterised by great importance of general debates on the floor. A purely competitive criterion mainly orients opposition parties – that is, they want to forge an alternative electoral profile for vote-seeking purposes. In doing so, opposition parties want to take advantage of the regular alternation of parties in government and by the succession of the various forms of party government (majority, minority and coalition). The Spanish Cortes have been “highly active” in controlling the executive and, as a result, one can say that the Spanish democracy has a high vitality in making accountability work. Direct monitoring is highly expanded

200  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

and, moreover, there is well-developed specialised scrutiny at the committee level. Together with indirizzo procedures, these mechanisms help curb moral hazard problems. In both countries, the number of written questions and requests for administrative reports is high. The number of written question is higher in Spain than in Portugal, while the contrary happens to administrative reports. Portuguese MPs tend to rely more on information received from public administration. Unlike Spain, where majority governments block them, ad hoc inquiry committees are a very relevant mechanism of accountability in Portugal. The debate on the creation of a committee is not relevant in Spain, but it is in Portugal. In both countries temporary committees and subcommittees are common. Their function is to report on policies and to operate as a mechanism to fight information asymmetries and moral hazard problems. Both countries have developed the use of committee hearings to obtain information. The use of this mechanism is more prevailing in the Portuguese Assembleia da Republica than in the Spanish Congreso. Indirizzo procedures ­directed at giving orientation to the government are standard in both countries. The primary determinant of accountability in Spain is the alternation of two parties, sometimes with a majority government and others with a minority one supported in parliament by nationalist parties. In Portugal, alternation of the right-wing coalition and the Socialist Party (sometimes with a minority government) has been the basis of parliamentary government. Such alternation has introduced a dynamic of highly bipolar competition between the two hegemonic parties that determines their opposition strategies. In Spain, the format of party government leads to two different opposition strategies: small nationalist parties are cooperative while big national parties are competitive. To sum up, a comparison of Iberian legislatures suggests that both countries have a similar accountability structure. However, the Spanish case has more developed accountability structures, particularly at the committee level. In the Portugal case, the existence of a popularly elected president is only relevant during the government formation stage. As of the 1982 reform, the executive is no longer accountable to the President. In that regard, in the two countries, the executives are only accountable to the parliament. In the Spanish case, bicameralism is relevant insofar as the Senate is very active in keeping tabs on the executive.

References

Capo Giol, J. (2005) “The Spanish Parliament in a Triangular Relationship, ­1982–2000”, in C. Leston-Bandeira (ed.), Southern European Parliaments in Democracy, London: Routledge, 56–84. Chevillier -Hiver, C. (2000) “La mission d’évaluation et de contrôle à l’Assemblée Nationale”, Revue du Droit Public, 6, 1679–1699.

Parliamentary accountability  201

Costa Lobo, M. (2012) “Regimenes parlamentarios y semipresidenciales en la

­Unión Europea”, in J. Lanzaro (ed.), Presidencialismo y parlamentarismo, Madrid: CEPC, 213–224. Cox, Gary W. (1987) The Efficient Secret, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Damgaard, E. (1992) “Denmark: Experiments in Parliamentary Government”, in E. Damgaard (ed.), Parliamentary Change in the Nordic Countries, Oslo: Scandinavian University Press, 19–51. Fernandes, J. M., Geese, L. and Schwemmer, C. (2019) The Impact of Candidate Selection Rules and Electoral Vulnerability on Legislative Behaviour in ­Comparative Perspective, European Journal of Political Research, 58(1), 270–291. Fernandes, J. M., Leston-Bandeira, C. and Schwemmer, C. (2018) “Election Proximity and Representation Focus in Party-Constrained Environments”, Party Politics, 24(6), 674–685. Filipe, A. (2009) “The 2007 Reform of the Portuguese Parliament: What Has Really Changed?”, The Journal of Legislative Studies, 15(1), 1–9. Fiorina, M. (1981) Retrospective Voting in American National Elections, New Haven: Yale University Press. Flores Juberias, C. (2003) “Spain: Delegation and Accountability in a Newly Established Democracy”, in K. Strom, W. Muller and T. Bergman (eds.), Delegation and Accountability in Parliamentary Democracies, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 573–593. Guerrero, E. (2004) El parlamento, Madrid: Síntesis. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2002) Da Legislação à Legitimação: o Papel do Parlamento Português, Lisboa: Imprensa de Ciências Sociais. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2004) From Legislation to Legitimation: The Role of the

­Portuguese Parliament, London: Routledge. Leston-Bandeira, C. and Fernandes, J. M. (2015) “Parliamentary Investiture Rules in Portugal’s Semi-Presidential Democracy”, in B. E. Rasch, S. Martin and J. A. Cheibub (eds.), Parliaments and Government Formation: Unpacking Investiture Rules, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 216–232. Leston-Bandeira, C. and Freire, A. (2005) “Internalising Lessons of Stable Democracy: The Portugues Parliament”, in C. Leston-Bandeira (ed.), Southern European Parliaments in Democracy, London: Routledge, 56–84. Manin, B. (1997). The Principles of Representative Government, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Mattson, I. and Strøm, K. (1995) “Parliamentary Committees”, in H. Doring (ed.), Parliaments and Majority Rule in Western Europe, Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 249–307. McCubbins, M. D. and Schwartz, T. (1984) “Congressional Oversight Overlooked: Police Patrols Versus Fire Alarms”, American Journal of Political Science, 28(1), 165–179. Moran, M. (2005) Politics and Governance in the UK, London: Palgrave. Paniagua Soto, J. L. (1997) “Spain: A Fledgling Parliament”, Parliamentary Affairs, 50, 1947–1997. Powell, G. B. and Powell Jr, G. B. (2000) Elections as Instruments of Democracy: Majoritarian and Proportional Visions, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

202  Manuel Sánchez de Dios

Raunio, T. and Wiberg, M. (2003) “Finland: Polarized Pluralism in the Shadow of a Strong President”, in K. Strom, W. Muller and T. Bergman (eds.), Delegation and Accountability in Parliamentary Democracies, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 301–324. Strøm, K. (2000) “Delegation and Accountability in Parliamentary Democracies”, European Journal of Political Research, 37(3), 261–290. Vitorino, A. (1988) “El control parlamentario del Gobierno”, Revista de Estudios Políticos, 60/61, 353–371.

Section V Relations with other bodies

Introduction

Much has been said concerning the “democratic deficit” of the European Union (EU) since the first elections of members of the European Parliament [EP] by direct and universal suffrage in 1979. Furthermore, the role of national parliaments (NPs) in the European political arena has evolved dramatically in these last 20 years, with the Lisbon Treaty, in particular, inaugurating a whole new era, with the attribution of subsidiarity control, although in a limited way, to NPs. Indeed, the coming into force of the ­Lisbon Treaty has greatly modified the role of the EP, as well as that of NPs, in the activity of the EU. Doctrine has highlighted the central role that the Treaty reserves both for the EP and for the NPs (Mangas Martín, 2008, p. 338; Remiro Brotóns, 2008, p. 42). Article 10.2 of the Treaty of the EU [TEU] states that

Citizens are directly represented at Union level in the EP. Member States are represented in the European Council by their Heads of State or Government and in the Council by their governments, themselves democratically accountable either to their NPs, or to their citizens.

It also explicitly states that “NPs contribute actively to the good functioning of the Union…”. Even with this explicit commitment in placing parliaments at the political centre, there are still voices that denounce the lack of democracy in the EU. The problem is, surely, that the law alone is not enough for institutions and citizens to feel they are jointly responsible for political action in the EU, some practice that attests to it is also necessary. To check if this is the case in Spain and Portugal, this chapter analyses the instruments and procedures used by their national parliaments, and the Autonomous Communities in the case of Spain, to participate in EU decisions. In 2001, Maurer and Wessels classed the Iberian legislatures in the weakest category within their typology, as slow adaptation parliaments, that is, those parliaments less intervening into the EU polity. This chapter explores whether this is still the case or whether these parliaments have become more active.

12 The participation of the Spanish and the Portuguese parliaments in the activity of the European Union

Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

206  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

The role of the Spanish and Portuguese parliaments in the European Union

As Chapter 3 showed, Spain joined the European Union in 1986 together with Portugal. Since then both parliaments have had an important role in the consideration of EU matters, although this varies according to the size of government majority. There is a parliamentary political direction of European affairs that drives the legislative and executive actions of the government in relation to the European institutions. That is to say, the government’s political direction needs to be combined with the democratic principle that is especially expressed in parliament and its activity so that, without prejudice to the executive powers in European decisions, the parliamentary democratizing participation remains open. At the moment of the accession, both Iberian Parliaments were a recent democratic construct, with barely 10 years of existence, after over 40 years under a dictatorship regime. Except for the year previous to the accession, the European integration debate rarely took place in parliament. The years after accession were still marked by the decision-making duo EC/Council of Ministers, with a strong intergovernmental nature, from which parliaments, either EP or NPs, were virtually excluded. The transposition of directives was a part of parliament competence only as a post-facto ratification procedure. There was no a priori discussion and authorization, no real scrutiny of the European decision-making process, the democratic control of the executive by parliament was thus weakened – hence the “democratic deficit” of the EU. Modifications came upon very soon after, triggered by the growing consciousness of that “democratic deficit”, not just a theoretical concept but a real problem and a delegitimizing situation. Soon after the accession, ­Portuguese MPs from different parties specifically focused on the conditions of the integration process, conscious of the fact that Portugal, a recent member, had a long way to fully integrate and understand the way European institutions worked. Law 28/87 laid down the terms for the scrutiny of European affairs by the Assembleia da República [AR], specifying the information the government was forced to make available to Parliament, including the government’s position on European policies. The new law established that “The Government shall consult the AR on the positions to be taken on the different European institutions”, particularly in matters involving parliament’s powers, notwithstanding its right to give opinions on matters of legislation or policy orientation of its own initiative to accompany the whole process of insertion of Portugal in the European communities. From then on, government had to send parliament the necessary information, including all legislative initiatives and projects. Parliament should each year evaluate the participation of Portugal in the Communities; the AR even had a role on structural funds, within the framework established by the national budget. This law would be revised in later years, each time strengthening the AR position in this scrutiny process.

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  207

The first decade of accession was a period of great change in the EU and its legislative procedure. Norton identifies three major challenges (1996): first, greater integration, with ever growing law making at the level of the Community, more powers bestowed upon the European institutions (and a new role to the elected EP); second, the explicit requirement of the involvement of parliaments in EU affairs laid down by the Maastricht Treaty and third, the two promising new pillars of the newly denominated EU, although both intergovernmental, extended the organization powers and competences of the European integration to new spheres. Norton considered that the response to those challenges concerned four different variables: the Constitution, the political culture, the party system, norms and practices of parliaments and parliamentary workloads. At that time, the Portuguese Parliament was “more concerned with the process of decision-making of European legislation than with the process of transposition”, which, nevertheless, largely escaped its control (Maurer and Wessels, 2001, p. 363), leading to a major role of the ex ante control. This was the period in which the “communitarian” doctrine framed the classic concept of the so called “democratic deficit”, in a sense that is not used any more:

By transferring competences from States to supranational institutions, like the Council or the Commission, the Treaties exclude them from the control of the respective parliaments. The fact that a substantial part of those powers are not submitted to the control of the EP makes them unaccountable to any democratic control. This is the “democratic deficit”. (Sande, 1994, p. 378)

Later on in the decade, the Amsterdam Treaty adopted Protocol 13, ­empowering NPs. It stated that all Commission documents “shall be promptly forwarded to NPs of the MS” and reaffirmed the importance of making proposals for legislation available to NPs; it nevertheless “carefully avoided imposing an obligation on member state governments” (Barrett, 2018, p. 9). The author calls the Amsterdam provisions “limited” in respect to the powers of parliaments. The most important aspect of those provisions was their binding nature. Also relevant was the confirmation of COSAC [Conférence des Organes Spécialisés dans les Affaires Communautaires – that is, conference of the EU NPs’ European Affairs Committees]: created outside the legal institutional framework of the Union at the Conference of Parliamentary Committees for Union Affairs of Parliaments of the EU in Madrid, in 1989, and gathered for the first time in Paris in November of that same year, COSAC was finally recognized as the legislative cooperation body by excellence for exchange of information and best practice between NPs. Nice followed. It ought to be the Treaty that concluded the institutional reform started in the IGC that led to the Maastricht Treaty, but things did not go well, and only Lisbon, some years later, would accomplish that deed, despite its insufficiencies. Notwithstanding, NPs received a new impulse towards a deeper and more intervening relationship with other institutions

208  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

(declaration 23, “Declaration on the future of Europe”). The Conference (the IGC) “calls for a deeper and wider debate about the future of the EU”. NPs are called upon the discussions as “interested parties”. The process should address, among others, “the role of NPs in the European architecture”. The issues to be addressed were intended to improve “the democratic legitimacy of the Union and its institutions, in order to bring them closer to the citizens”. Later on, on the wake of the discussions of the Convention, the so called “Barroso Initiative” promoted a political dialogue with NPs. The new approach, part of the so-called plan D, became the cornerstone of the EU/NPs’ relationship, with more than 100 meetings between Commissioners and NPs in 2006 alone; in May, the EC communication to the ­European Council “A Citizens’ Agenda – Delivering Results For Europe” (COM (2006)211), foresaw the Commission obligation to send all new proposals to NPs, with an invitation for reactions. The Portuguese Parliament was, from the start, one of the most active in issuing opinions to the attention of the EC, as explained later on in this chapter. The Lisbon Treaty went even further than IGC 2004, the basis for the failed Constitutional Treaty, in associating NPs to the European process. Article 10 of the Lisbon Treaty declared that “The functioning of the Union shall be founded on representative democracy” and article 12 acknowledged the role of NPs as part of the institutional framework of the EU, explicitly and formally recognized in the letter of the Treaties: “NPs contribute actively to the good functioning of the Union” through a series of mechanisms and rights (article 12). Two protocols annexed to the EU Treaty defined how NPs should intervene in the institutional framework of the Union, particularly in the ­decision-making process. They concerned the information to be supplied (“Information for NPs”) and inter-parliamentary cooperation (Protocol 1) and the important application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality (Protocol 2). The AR participation and its legal responsibilities in the accompanying of European affairs was changed accordingly to the mentioned evolution of the European legislation. Law 43/2006, which revoked and replaced law 20/94, established the new subsidiarity principle opinion (not yet binding) in article 3. It also took in consideration the new role of parliament proposed by the “Barroso initiative”, rendering it much more effective either in the relationship with the government and its European policies or in respect to the interaction with the European institutions, in particular the EP.

The role of parliamentary committees and the plenary in the scrutiny of EU affairs

The role of EU affairs specialized committees

The Joint Committee for the EU is the central parliamentary body in the Spanish institutional system for the knowledge, inspection and parliamentary

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  209

direction of the activity of the EU and the participation in said policy of the Union by the Spanish Government (Delgado Iribarren, 2015, p. 255). The importance of this parliamentary body is so great that we could even say that, in European matters, it is more important than the Chambers’ plenary sessions, which in many cases only intervene at the request of the Committee. The Joint Committee for the EU is more than 30 years old, time during which it has transformed itself to contribute to the political will to improve the democratization of the Union. According to the law, Spanish governments should inform it of all legislative proposals received from the Commission or other European institutions as soon as possible. It should also present to the Committee a report on the content of the legislative proposals of the Union that would have an impact on Spain so that the Committee, if considered it appropriate, can open a debate in which the Government participates and gives explanations to the Chambers. The law also provides that the government regularly submits a report on the decisions taken at the European Council for the purpose of scrutiny by the Plenary. The Joint Committee has been gaining political prominence over the years and the reinforcement of NPs given in the Lisbon Treaty has been a new and important incentive for its “centrality” in European matters. However, it is still possible to make improvements for better scrutiny by the Joint Committee, by making it less dependent from the parliamentary majority, with minority parliamentary groups having a greater role and the agreements of the Committee being taken more into account. Likewise, the European Affairs Committee (EAC) in Portugal is the centre of Parliament’s intervention in European affairs. This is recognized by law as at the core of European matters scrutiny, with the government being obliged yearly to present a report about the relationship between Portugal and the European Communities. The Committee has the responsibility to present an annual report on European legislation and the orientation of European policies, as a basis for debate in the plenary, having also to meet regularly with Portuguese MEPs. The Portuguese parliament monitors and assesses the participation of Portugal in the EU mainly through EAC, giving opinions on relevant matters which fall into its reserved legislative mandate. Initiatives and proposals, as well as government information and requests for an opinion, are channelled through the Committee, being then sent to the competent parliamentary committees. After the approval of a report by the Committee, it pronounces itself through a written opinion, pronouncing the compliance of a certain initiative with the principle of subsidiarity or simply giving an opinion about the documents submitted. Opinions approved by the EAC are sent to the President of Parliament, the government and the EU. If there is a reasoned opinion determining the proposal in question infringes the subsidiarity principle, the EAC submits it to the Plenary, where it is debated and approved or rejected.

210  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

The role of the plenary

The role of the Spanish Joint Committee for the EU is so important that, although it is common practice in parliaments to give primacy to the Plenary to the detriment of committees, certain plenary interventions in the Spanish legislature are only agreed to at this Committee’s request (Salazar Quiñonez, 2015, p. 197). However, the Plenary still plays an important role, as follows:

a The government must appear before the Congress of Deputies after each ordinary or extraordinary European Council meeting in order to inform the groups and debate with them (Article 4 Law 8/1994). To do this, the government must previously send a written report of the most relevant issues discussed in the Council meeting. b The Joint Committee may request the President of either of the two Chambers to hold a debate on a legislative proposal in the respective Plenary in which the government will participate (Article 3.c Law 8/1994). c The Plenary may intervene in the subsidiarity procedure (Article 5.2 of Law 8/1994) if the debate and vote on the opinion is taken up by the ­Plenary of one of the Chambers. In which case, the Joint Committee must submit its opinion to both Chambers. d The Plenary can oppose legislative initiatives taken by the European Council to authorize the Council to pronounce by qualified majority instead of unanimously, or to adopt legislative acts by the ordinary legislative procedure instead of adopting them through a special procedure. If this decision is ratified by both Chambers, it is sent to government for their knowledge.

As explained above, the EAC is the Portuguese’s key body for scrutiny of EU matters. However, despite the EAC’s centrality, the plenary has a concrete role to play, as follows:

a It is its responsibility to adopt legislation to transpose EU directives, as proposed by government. They are discussed and voted first by the different committees according to their subject area, and then debated and voted in the Plenary. b The annual list of “enhanced scrutiny” initiatives is submitted to the Plenary, resulting into a resolution. c A plenary debate, with the prime minister, is held before each European Council. For example, four of these debates were held between September 2017 and September 2018, with the first one having taken place in June 2012. d A plenary debate with the government takes place at the beginning of each Presidency of the Council to discuss its priorities, as well as the executive annual report on EU relationships.

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  211

e A State of the Union debate following the one held at the EP by the President of the EC takes place every year (usually in September). f A plenary debate concerning all aspects of the EU economic governance, the European Semester and the Stability and Growth Program, is held every year, also with the government.

The role of other parliamentary committees

The existence of a specific committee for European affairs generates an organizational problem within the scope of the Spanish parliament. Committees are implemented according to subject areas (e.g. Defence Committee, Health Committee, etc.), but when a Committee is created with more of an “institutional” and horizontal function, such as the Joint Committee of the EU, a problem arises of a conflict of roles. To solve this problem, Law 8/1994, says that “The Committee may request, through the Committee of Congress, that another Committee or other Committees of both Chambers inform in advance concerning a specific issue”. In practice, however, this is not always linear, particularly in the cases of foreign policy, security and ­defence, which are discussed in the Foreign Affairs Committee, with matters related to justice and internal affairs in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and those related to economic and monetary union in the Economy and Finance Committee. In Portugal, each parliamentary committee has a role in European affairs, depending on the contents of the matter – and the draft legislation. The horizontal nature of the EAC may sometimes become a problem, especially because it is its responsibility to distribute the relevant initiatives and legislative proposals received to the respective parliamentary committees. Those committees then produce a report for EAC. Reaffirming its authority and prevalence in European matters, Law 21/2012 establishes that whenever this Committee’s opinion diverges from the subject areas committees’ reports concerning the break of the subsidiarity principle, its view prevails.

Parliaments’ participation in inter-parliamentary cooperation

Inter-parliamentary cooperation is recognized in Articles 9 and 10 of Protocol 1 of the TEU. Article 9 calls for both the EP and NPs to jointly organize and promote “effective” and “regular” inter-parliamentary cooperation within the Union. In addition, Article 10 recognizes that COSAC may direct to the EP, the Council, and the Commission any contribution it deems appropriate. In particular, it establishes among the tasks of this Conference: the exchange of information and good practices between NPs and the EP and its specialized committees, and the organization of inter-parliamentary conferences on specific topics, in particular to discuss matters of common foreign policy and security.

212  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

In Spain, the Joint Committee participates in the exchange of information and the convening of meetings of the cooperating bodies that are in operation (COSAC, Conference of Presidents, Committees, etc.) within the scope of the EP and NPs. However, the intervention of Spain in some of these organizations has not been of great importance. For example, Spain did not have a representative in COSAC until 2010; the Joint Committee has not participated in many pilot COSAC programs on the application of subsidiarity; nor has it participated in the pilot tests on the Europol and Eurojust agencies (XLI COSAC, biannual report, Prague 2009, p. 232). The Spanish Parliament even stated that it was against the holding of regular debates on these matters (XLII COSAC Madrid 2010, p. 41). That is to say, the Spanish parliament has limited itself, at least until 2013, to attending the meetings of COSAC to carry out exclusively an exchange of information. Spanish participation has however taken place in other fora such as the Conference of Speakers of the Parliaments of the EU. Unlike Spain, Portugal’s participation in different inter-institutional fora and bodies with the EU has been longstanding and extensive, as patent in the following:

1 The AR is an active member of all inter-parliamentary platforms, and an extensive user of IPEX, the parliamentarian platform for information exchange at the European level. 2 The Conference of Speakers of the Parliaments of the EU is one of the most important fora for inter-institutional parliamentary cooperation. Held annually since 1980, it became an autonomous forum in 1999 responsible for coordinating that cooperation. 3 Portugal has been an active member of COSAC since its setting-up in 1989, with several of its meetings taking place in Portugal ever since. The last time COSAC gathered in Portugal was in 2007. The reform that would become the Lisbon Treaty was at the centre of its discussion, with the AR President underlining the role of NPs under the new Treaty. For the first time, the President of the EC, Durão Barroso, Portuguese, addressed the plenary of COSAC. Portuguese deputies have contributed extensively to the debates and conclusions of COSAC’s over 50 plenary meetings. In 2015, Maria J. Rodrigues (MEP) was keynote speaker in the debate that decided to invite the European Council to improve the reasoned opinion procedure and introduce a “green card” in the political dialogue. From January 2007 to the end of June 2008, the AR participated in the presidential troika of the Secretariat of COSAC. Plus, many other inter-parliamentary meetings and activities take place in this context. 4 NPs have representatives in Brussels, the so called “Antennas”. Each Member-Sate can decide to place them in order to reinforce their presence with the European institutions. The AR created this position in 2008, filled by a parliamentary official. Portugal was the

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  213

32nd Parliament of all 40 chambers to establish a permanent representative in Brussels (before Spain, in 2010), and has had three such representatives.

The intensification of parliamentary cooperation goes both ways – from ­Europe and its institutions to NPs, as well as in the other direction, ­depending on parliaments’ initiative in deepening and diversifying such cooperation. The Portuguese Parliament has actively sought to reinforce these, such as, for instance, in 2011, when the President of the AR invited three EP committees to participate in an ordinary meeting in Portugal to consider the decentralization of the EP’s workload. But, as Dias Pinheiro puts it,

(…) NPs nowadays engage not only with their traditional and most obvious counterparts (national governments and EP), but also among themselves and with the EC, in a constant learning process that should lead to a consistent search for the operational, innovative and ­solution-oriented ways to strengthen their role in EU affairs. In this context, the other trend that can be identified (…) is a shift in the motivation that drives this cooperation, gradually evolving from a combination of efforts to produce a negative output by blocking proposals on the basis of a breach of the subsidiarity principle in a subsidiarity-obsessed way to a new dynamic process that actively proposes new paths and solutions. (2017, p. 103)

Even though annual reports on the activity concerning European affairs are explicit about the effort and motivation of Portuguese MPs in parliamentarian cooperation and European drive, the different perspectives of NPs make the prospect of a more constructive and effective process elusive.

The consideration of EU legislative proposals by the Spanish Parliament

All draft legislative acts, wherever they come from, have to be sent for knowledge and opinion, where appropriate, to the NP. The secretariat and the spokespeople of the Spanish Joint Committee of the EU then carry out a preliminary examination of the draft legislative acts sent by the institutions of the Union. Law 24/2009 establishes that as soon as the Congress of Deputies and the Senate receive a legislative initiative from the EU, they send it to the Parliaments of the Autonomous Communities, without prejudging the existence of autonomic competences, for the purpose of their knowledge and that, if applicable, they can send a reasoned opinion to the General Courts. To give this opinion, the Parliaments of the Autonomous Communities have a period of four weeks from the referral of the European initiative (Articles 6.1 and 6.2). They can also ask the government for a report on the conformity of the legislative act with the principle of subsidiarity.

214  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

The intervention of national and regional parliaments

The relationship between national and regional parliaments, in relation to the Early Warning mechanism isn’t always very straightforward, for a number of reasons. First with the concept itself of a NP, something raised when talks began about the Early Warning Mechanism. Working Group I of the Constitutional Convention dealt with the matter in depth and raised two major problems: how to manage countries with unicameral and bicameral parliaments and how to organize the intervention of regional parliaments in decentralized states. The solution was to attribute two votes to each parliament, so that if they have two chambers, each would have a vote. However, a third option has also arisen, such as the case of Spain, whereby NPs manage this matter through a Joint Committee of both chambers, in which case this is the body that makes the reasoned opinion. Equally important is the issue of how regional parliaments intervene in decentralized states. The Protocol makes an express mention of the matter when it says in Article 6 “It will be for each national parliament or each chamber of a national parliament to consult, where appropriate, regional parliaments with legislative powers”. However, this raises problems:

a The first problem is of a formal nature. When and how are the regional parliaments consulted? The national parliament is the one that has to open such a consultation, but bearing in mind that the time period for issuing the reasoned opinion is short, this could generate significant problems. In the Spanish case it was decided that the legislative act of the Union is referred to the regional parliaments ex officio, so that the procedure is not stopped in the national parliament at its outset, and the regional parliaments can issue an opinion in a period of four weeks from Parliament’s referral of the European legislative initiative, which can then prepare their opinion knowing the position of the regional parliament. b The second is of a substantial nature. What are the effects of the opinions of the regional parliaments? It seems that the requirement is of mere consultation, from which it can be deduced that they do not condition the position of the national parliament. However, we could find ourselves with a legislative act of the EU that by reason of its matter is the exclusive competence of one or several Autonomous Communities, which would lead us to have to rethink the question. The thesis maintained here is that regional parliaments cannot condition the action of a national parliament, which is also the case here. However, the latter should take into account the position of the opinions of those parliaments which represent the political position of those that have competence in the matter. The paradox that arises here is that the national parliament issues a reasoned opinion according to political criteria, but in the event that the competence on the matter belongs to the Autonomous Communities, it could result that, although their parliaments

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  215

have elaborated their policy position on the legislative act of the EU, in the end it would be the national parliament that would fix the position of the Spanish State according to the political criteria of the state chamber.

Evaluation of the process of considering EU legislation

The Spanish Parliament has produced 254 Processing Reports, with 10 ­Observation reports and 14 Reports of infringement. An analysis of these reveals the following conclusions: The brief time available to the different institutions carrying out the scrutiny – eight weeks in general – has introduced a level of work in the Joint Committee for the European Union that almost monopolizes the meetings of its secretariat and spokespeople, as well as Committee’s sessions of the Plenary. This intensity of work was already recognized in the conclusions of a report launched in the 9th Legislature, which said that it would be more appropriate to establish an office to organize the development of all work related to this matter. Although parliamentarians individually or through parliamentary groups can present evaluation initiatives, the practice has been that it is the meeting of the secretariat and the spokespeople that decides which issues should be studied and submitted for evaluation. Obviously, everybody knows that this entails a “prejudice” in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity of all those acts that are considered not necessary to be reviewed. A previous judgement, made by a body of “government and functioning of the ­chamber” – the Committee’s secretariat – that does not have sufficient political powers to decide on such matters.

On the intervention of the government in the issuance of reports

The first thing that must be pointed out is that Law 24/2009 establishes that in order to issue a reasoned opinion, the Spanish Parliament can “request the government to report on the conformity of the legislative act with the principle of subsidiarity”. That is to say, the request for the government report is optional, with the government not being obliged as regards its preparation and issuance. Parliamentary practice has been for the Committee’s secretariat to send the corresponding legislative initiative to the government for its information. The government’s position at this time is of interest, although it has not yet revealed clear criteria for action: in 2010, of 22 requests for a report, it issued 10; 14 in 2011, of 19 applications, and 16 in 2012, of 22 applications. Therefore, the most frequent is the issuance of the report and, in most cases, it does so in accordance with the European legislative claim. In many of them, it even stops to point out the opportunity of the new norm and the conformity with the principles of subsidiarity.

216  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

When the government issues a report to a legislative act, in which it states that it may affect the principle of subsidiarity, the common practice is that the opinion of the Committee follows this criterion. This is the case of the two opinions of 2011, and in three of the six opinions issued in 2012. In the other three, the Committee also did not act on the government’s criterion since it did not report. What is not common is that the Committee’s position differs markedly from the government’s criteria. The practice of so-called “rationalized parliamentarianism” appears with remarkable clarity here as well. So much so that in the case that gave rise to Report 6/2012 on the “Regulation on the exercise of the right to adopt measures of collective conflict” on which the government reported positively and the appointed Chair negatively, this resulted in the report being rejected by the Committee, with a new Chair being appointed, who issued a positive report, in line with the government and which was finally approved by the Committee. It is noteworthy that in some cases where the legislative initiatives relate to issues of particular importance, such as fiscal policy, capital control, or copyright, the government has responded with silence and has not issued a corresponding report. Of course, the legislation does not oblige the government to send a report to parliament, but it is striking that in cases of such political importance the executive does not want to make a formal statement. See, for instance, Opinion 1/2012 of the “Directive concerning the awarding of concession contracts” in which the government, for the first time, did not report a legislative act of the Union and to which parliament issued an opinion of total disagreement on the understanding that the new norm could affect subsidiarity.

On the position of the autonomous communities in the issuance of their opinions

The first thing to note is the low number of opinions coming from the ­Parliaments of the Autonomous Communities and that a very large majority are in accordance. There seems to be some fatigue towards the issuance of opinions, leading to a decrease in its use. The reasons explaining this may be very diverse: perhaps they understand that the new European regulation does not affect their competences; perhaps they consider that since the Joint Committee is not obliged to follow their criteria, their own reports are of “little use”; surely one reason is the short period of time – four weeks – and the remarkable increase in workload that entails for the respective parliaments to carry out this process. In any case, and leaving aside speculations, what the data shows is that in many cases where the competence of Autonomous Communities can clearly be affected, few of them speak up. For example, in Opinion 1/2012 of the “Directive concerning the awarding of concession contracts”, opinions were only given by the Basque Parliament, the Aragonese Courts and the Assembly of Extremadura, despite this being a matter affecting the competencies

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  217

of many other Communities. On the other hand, as already indicated, in this case the position of the Committee was one of disagreement with the criterion of the autonomous parliaments. Another very significant case is that of Opinion 3/2012 of the “Directive on priority substances in water policy” that most certainly affects the public health competencies of many Communities. However, only the Basque Parliament, the Courts of Castile and León and the Assembly of Extremadura reported.

The consideration of EU legislative proposals by the Portuguese parliament

As explained above, all draft legislative European acts have to be sent for knowledge and opinion to the NPs. The AR can, at any time, give an opinion about decisions pending on subjects of its reserved competence within the European decision procedure (art. 161 of the Portuguese Constitution) and about the general orientation of policies and actions of the EU. It can also ask the government at all time for information about the national orientation concerning political issues, particularly those of its reserved competence, and give a (non-binding) opinion about them. Also, since the Barroso initiative in 2006, it started issuing opinions on different matters in the framework of the so called “political dialogue”. And finally, it scrutinizes the respect for the subsidiarity principle in all European legislative proposals. The establishment of the methodology for that scrutiny in Portugal is a competence of the EAC, approved in 2013, and improved upon in 2016. That change, at the beginning of a new legislature (2015–2019), was justified by the need to improve AR’s influence over the European decision process. The implementation of the systematic scrutiny of European initiatives involving EAC and other committees, as well as the hearings with members of government, MEPs, Commissioners and other assures a dynamic and comprehensive involvement of the AR in the European integration process.

The early warning methodology at AR

Like in Spain, all draft legislative acts within the European decisional process are sent for opinion to the AR. After Lisbon, the subsidiarity a priori control became, at least theoretically, the most important intervention of NPs in the EU decision-making process. It became known as “Early Warning Procedure” (EWP). Since 2008, coinciding with the reinforcement of the role of parliaments, the Lisbon Treaty and the AR participation in the COSAC troika (see above), the Portuguese Parliament has systematically led the ranking of NPs in terms of scrutiny of European initiatives and political dialogue. The new EWP enhanced the role of permanent representatives, as well as the importance of the information flux between Brussels and Lisbon, with a major contribution by Portuguese MEPs.

218  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

The steps for this assessment are as follows: the permanent Working Group for Scrutiny of European initiatives, which has five MPs, each from a different parliamentary group, and integrates EAC, receives the documents sent by the EU (as well as government’s requests and information). The Group identifies the initiatives to be scrutinized and submits these to the EAC for ratification, following which the initiatives, whether legislative or non-­legislative, are sent to the competent parliamentary committees. Their opinion, which may also include those of the Legislative Assemblies of ­Portugal’s two Autonomous Regions, is forwarded to the Committee when concluded. This is then followed by a written opinion drafted by a rapporteur from EAC, which is then debated at Committee level and, if a non-­ compliance with the principle of subsidiarity reasoned opinion is adopted, the Plenary meets for consideration and final vote. If not adopted, the opinion is sent to the European institutions and government and placed in IPEX. The whole process must be completed in eight weeks.

Early warning process and political dialogue

Since 2010, the AR, through EAC, annually identifies a number of European initiatives priorities, based upon the Annual Working Program of the EC. They are considered priority for scrutiny. There were only seven in 2010 (AR resolution n.98/2010), six in 2011 and 2012, and then 65 in 2013 (AR resolution n.79/2013), a number that dropped into more reasonable figures in the following years: 24 (2014), 32 (2015), 23 (2016), 21 (2017) and 26 in 2018 (AR resolution n.139/2018). The priority initiatives do not necessarily correspond to the number of initiatives scrutinized; they just identify policies and objectives. In 2018, for instance, some of the initiatives approved include the EU action plan for circular economy, multiannual financial framework, creation of the post of European Minister for Economy and Finances. In some cases (namely the last one), there is not even a concrete legislative initiative, in others several legislative draft acts may be proposed. Portugal ranked systematically first in the overall issuing of opinions, ­either within the context of EWP or political dialogue. In 2011, for instance, according to the EC annual reports, 184 opinions were transmitted, the second most prolific Parliament being the Italian (with 76). That year the EC acknowledged AR as “the most active national Parliament” in the legislative European process (Report, 12th Legislature, p. 7). And yet, in 2006 no opinions were transmitted; in 2007 there were already 19, the fifth more prolific parliament; 65 in 2008, 106 in 2010. In 2013, a new high was reached, 192 opinions, a number that decreased in 2014 (but still 118, representing 23 per cent of the total). Reflecting the new methodology approved in 2013, the number of opinions sent to the Commission in 2015 was 55, still the highest amidst Parliaments/Chambers, and 57 in 2016, third in the ranking, led by the Italian Senate. The number of opinions transmitted to the EC reached a peak of 192 in 2013 and has been decreasing since. The workload became

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  219

more reasonable: 63 in 2016 and 64 in 2017 (out of the 1,427 included in IPEX since 2006, an average of 119 per year). On the other hand, in 2011 the Portuguese Parliament considered for the first time, in one case, that the subsidiarity principle had been breached. In 2012 another proposal was considered as in breach. In 2013, under the new methodology approved by the AR, one other proposal was also considered a breach of the principle. The issue of breach of the subsidiarity principle would only then be raised again in 2016. The establishment of a permanent representative of the AR to the EU institutions in 2008 consolidated a more effective participation of the ­Portuguese Parliament, particularly in the process of scrutiny. It is in part due to the network of parliamentarian antennas in Brussels that the exchange of information between parliaments – sharing arguments, ideas and opinions – became possible. The so-called Monti II is a good example of that interaction: following an intensive exchange of information between NPs, through their permanent representatives in Brussels, three AR Committees, including of course EAC, were encouraged to give their opinion: the one from EAC was in support of a breach of subsidiarity. Approved by the Plenary the 18th of May 2012, it became the first “yellow card” in the sense of Protocol 2. The AR had not envisaged at first such a position, but the vote assured the necessary threshold of 18 votes (Dias Pinheiro, 2012, p. 87); that change of position was in part due to the extensive exchange of communication between Lisbon and the network of permanent representatives in Brussels. In short, between 2011 and 2018, the AR approved four reasoned opinions declaring the non-compliance of proposals with the principle of subsidiarity:

• Proposal for regulation COM (2011) 560, approved the 4th of November 2011. • Proposal for regulation COM (2012) 130, approved the 18th of May 2012. • Proposal for regulation COM (2012) 788, approved the 26th of February 2013. • Proposal for regulation COM (2016) 53, adopted the 15th of April 2016.

AR and the regional parliaments

Some of the issues raised above in relation to the relationship between the national and the autonomous Parliaments in Spain, apply mutatis mutandis to its equivalent in Portugal, in relation to its Legislative Assemblies for Madeira and the Azores. Notwithstanding, in view of the differing nature of the two political systems, the Portuguese situation does not raise the same kind of issues as in Spain. The archipelago of the Azores and the Island of Madeira and Porto Santo constitute Autonomous Regions of Portugal, endowed with a legal character of public law, with political, legislative, administrative, financial and patrimonial autonomy. The Portuguese Constitution in its article 227 establishes the powers of the autonomous regions

220  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

and foresees their participation in the European integration process in all matters concerning them. Whenever it is the case, these regions’ legislative assemblies can submit their opinions to EAC, but those opinions are not binding: if the national opinion does not coincide, it prevails, the regional opinions being sent as an attachment to it. This can be exemplified with the recent reasoned opinion on the Proposal for a Directive on the Approximation of Laws, Regulations and Administrative Provisions of the MS concerning Tobacco (COM 788/2012) (2017). The Portuguese opinion considered that a breach of the subsidiarity principle existed, the same opinion of the Azores’ Legislative Assembly, but contrary to Madeira’s evaluation. The national view was therefore sent with all those opinions attached, the one of the AR prevailing.

AR and the government

Parliament’s scrutiny of the executive’s European policies varies considerably. In rare cases, parliaments are effective in determining the negotiation limits the government must follow when debating European public policies within the legislative process procedures, with the most notable case being the one of the Danish Parliament. According to Christensen, this is due to its strong up-stream procedures, which ensures a considerable level of consensus between parties and affected interests (2010). His thesis is simple: in Denmark, the handling of European affairs, including European legislation, is done “up-stream”, that is, issues are dealt “before and during the ­negotiations at EU level”. And “If up-stream control is effective it ensures that parliament is involved at a stage where EU legislation is still in the making” (Christensen, 2010, p. 3). The paradox is that in a country such as ­Denmark, in which European issues have been divisive since the beginning of its accession to EU, consensus exists and EU legislation is not very present in the whole juridical corpus of the country; due to the up-stream control installed since the beginning. In Portugal such up-stream is non-existent or, at least, rather weak. The capacity of parliament to determine the boundaries of government’s commitment in any given EU legislation is, to say the least, limited. Political scrutiny by the AR relies on hearings of members of government, the analysis (post-facto) of the government’s annual report about the Portuguese participation in EU and debates in the Plenary or casual requests for information in specific cases. But this is more or less all and it cannot be compared to the Danish example, in which control is done a priori – when it is more effective, even if it jeopardizes the government’s negotiation margin. Can we then conclude about the Portuguese Parliament – one of the most active in terms of European legislation scrutiny – that it still is, as advanced by Maurer and Wessels (2001), a “slow adaptation Parliament”? In fact, change is of the essence and the Portuguese legislature evolved

Participation of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments  221

tremendously in these last 30 years since the accession. MPs exercise a thorough and comprehensive scrutiny of European legislative initiatives and they are very active, particularly through the EAC, at examining, debating, proposing and giving opinions on European issues of all kind. Thus, the scarce control of the executive “up-stream” simply reflects a political culture that still envisages the executive as the main engine of participation in international bodies. Furthermore, governments are the expression of majorities in parliament, and thus their decisions taken in a rather un-popular context as the one in Brussels are not a matter of public interest. Even when the government, in terms of parliament’s majority, depends on political parties that are against the European integration – as the case in Portugal during the 2015–2019 legislature –, European issues seldom emerge as relevant and even less decisive. Government decides and parliament follows, based upon a common vision of the parties at the centre of the political scene, and that is simply a consequence of the political culture of Portugal. Although the law is seemingly adequate to fill the democratic gap, its enforcement is not always perfect. Indeed, as a political source in the Portuguese Parliament put it, the majority of those acting in Parliament, either MEPs (with the possible exception of those in EAC) or even officials, tend to avoid the European issues, either because they do not know them, or because they are not prone to attract media attention. This does not mean that the Portuguese Parliament has not become much more an intervening legislature in European affairs than it used to be. The number of opinions issued, the presence in Brussels, the interaction and cooperation with institutions and bodies in the EU, the constant activity of the EAC and its centrality, the number of auditions and meetings concerning Europe and the European integration process, confirm it.

References

Barrett, G., (2018) The Evolving Role of National Parliaments in the European ­Union – Ireland as a Case Study, Manchester, Manchester University Press Christensen, G.J., (2010) “Keeping in Control: The Modest Impact of EU on Danish Legislation”, Public Administration, 88 (1), 18–35. Wiley Online Library. Delgado-Iribarren, M. (2015) “La incorporación de la Comisión Mixta para la

­Unión Europea de las Cortes Generales al control de la aplicación del principio de subsidiariedad y al diálogo político con las instituciones legislativas de la Unión Europea”, European Ikings, 5, 250–261. Dias Pinheiro, B. (2012) O Tratado de Lisboa e a adaptação dos Parlamentos nacionais aos desafios da integração europeia: o caso dos representantes permanentes dos Parlamentos junto das instituições da União Europeia, Lisbon, Instituto Superior de Ciências Sociais e Politicas, Universidade Técnica de Lisboa. Dias Pinheiro, B. (2017) “Inter-Parliamentary Cooperation between National Parliaments”, in Cornell, A. and Goldoni, M. (eds), National and Regional Parliaments in the EU – Legislative Procedure Post-Lisbon: The Impact of the Early Warning Mechanism, London, Bloomsbury Publishing, 87–113.

222  Elviro Aranda Álvarez and Paulo Almeida Sande

Mangas Martín, A. (2008) “Un Tratado no tan simple: el realismo mágico del funcionalismo”, Revista de Derecho Comunitario Europeo, 30, 335–348. Maurer, A. and Wessels, W. (eds) (2001) National Parliaments on Their Ways to

­Europe: Losers or Latecomers? Baden-Baden, Nomos Verlagsgesellschaf. Norton, P. (1996), National Parliaments and the European Union, London, Routledge. Remiro Brotóns, A. (2008) “Pretéritos futuros y futuros pretéritos de la Unión

­Europea”, Revista de Derecho Comunitario Europeo, 29, 21–47. Salazar Quiñonez, A. (2015) La participación de los parlamentos nacionales en la Unión Europea. Madrid, Edit. Departamento de Publicaciones del Congreso de los Diputados. Sande, P. (1994) Fundamentos da União Europeia, Lisbon, Edições Cosmos.

Introduction

Several countries have experienced processes of decentralization, federalization, and devolution in the last four decades. The regional (sub-national) political arenas gained political competences and jurisdiction over a large number of relevant fields, broadly influencing citizens’ everyday life. With those processes, the newly created or transformed regional arenas – and their institutions and elites – became particularly important political entities, interacting with the national statewide ones, and influencing and shaping them in many ways. This is why the study of sub-state or regional arenas and their institutions matters, as well as that of their linkages, cooperation, and coordination relationships with national-wide ones. This chapter analyses how national and regional parliaments interact in Spain and Portugal. These are very dissimilar countries regarding the level of decentralization. Spain is highly decentralized, as the country is organized as a whole in regions with significant autonomic administrative, political, and financial powers; whereas Portugal is not very decentralized, with only two autonomous regions, corresponding to the two Portuguese archipelagos. If the former can be considered as a paradigmatic case of a multi-level political system, the latter can hardly be designated as such. We assess whether the relationship between national and regional political bodies is substantially affected by the level of decentralization, by highlighting the similarities and differences arising across both cases. Notwithstanding its differences, comparing these two cases is of relevance, as they are also very alike regarding its recent political history, allowing to exert some control over the effects of other political variables. As a general consequence of such comparison, there is much more to say about the Spanish case than the Portuguese. In the last four decades Spain became a highly decentralized – de facto federal – multi-layered country. The 17 regions (comunidades autónomas) exert extensive and intensive powers in the most important political domains, designing their own institutions and developing their policies, with administrative, political, and financial autonomy (managing nowadays most of the public expenditure). Regional political elites have also

13 The relationship between regional and national parliaments in Spain and Portugal

Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

224  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

developed in these regions, sharing some traits with the national one, but showing some distinguishing characteristics of their own (Oñate 2018a; Oñate and Viera 2018). The Constitution defines the Senate as the ‘territorial representation chamber’, but it does not fulfil this role. It follows party lines in its integration and functioning and does not work as a coordination and integration forum of the multi-level system. Cohesive and centralized political parties are the key leading actors, shaping the relationships between national and regional politics.1 Their parliamentary party groups are (ultra)-integrated-parliamentary party complexes (Heidar and Koole 2000), where a few hands control the activity in the chamber, and individual MPs always follow party leadership guidelines (Oñate 1999; Oñate and Delgado 2006; Oñate 2008). Unlike Spain, transition to democracy did not drive Portugal towards decentralization. Only the archipelagos of Azores and Madeira are autonomous regions endowed with political-administrative statutes and self-­ governing bodies. These autonomous regions are constitutionally granted a broad range of political and administrative powers (Article 227). As the Portuguese Constitution posits, the political-administrative autonomy of these archipelagos does not affect the integrity of State sovereignty (Article 6). The country remains as unitary. What is more, the Portuguese Constitution does not allow the existence of regional parties (Article 51º). Although differently from Spain, as there are no regional political parties, parties in Portugal also play a core role in shaping the relationship between the national and the regional levels. This is partially explained by the fact that the Portuguese parliamentary system is highly cohesive and party-centred, which is enlightened by the tendency for strong party discipline (Braga da Cruz 1988; Leston-Bandeira 2009; Lobo et al. 2012). Notwithstanding the growing relevance of regional political arenas, and the increasing salience of parliaments for political life, the relationships between national and regional parliaments is still an understudied field. In fact, there is no appropriate comprehensive framework to study those interactions. Given the overwhelming leading role political parties play, we will draw from the literature on vertical integration of political parties (Duverger 1954; Janda 1980; Smiley 1987; Dyck 1991; Deschouwer 2003; Hopkin 2003; Thorlakson 2003, 2009, 2011; Pruysers 2014), borrowing some concepts to study the interdependence, linkages and interaction between national and regional parliaments. We analyse the linkages and relationships between national and regional parliaments in Spain and, to a lesser extent, in Portugal (because it is not decentralized but also due to lack of data). To do so, the section “Institutional linkage-mechanisms for coordination and cooperation between national and regional parliaments” investigates the institutional formal linkage mechanisms and their effectiveness. Given the importance of external party organization for parliamentary life, the section “National and regional parliaments’ linkage through political parties’ vertical integration”

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  225

focuses onto political parties’ mechanisms of vertical integration, interdependences, and linkages among their national and regional branches. The section “Vertical integration at the MP level” analyses national and regional vertical integration from the individual or micro-level point of view: MPs’ profiles, multi-level trajectories, and contacts with members at the ‘other’ level in their everyday political activity. The section “Conclusion” presents the main conclusions and findings and suggests further avenues for research in this (under-studied) field.

Institutional linkage-mechanisms for coordination and cooperation between national and regional parliaments

Spain can be considered a federal system. The institutional setting at both levels, national and regional, has been intensively developed in the last three decades. Nevertheless, neither the Constitution, nor the regional Statutes for Autonomy, or the national and the regional parliaments’ Rules of Procedure provide for strong formal linkage mechanisms for cooperation and coordination between them. And as explained above, the Senate does not play that linkage-role. The intense cooperative relationships are developed mainly by the respective executive branches, with interaction between the legislatures of a much smaller scope and significance. Nevertheless, there are five formal institutional mechanisms of interaction between national and regional parliaments, with varying levels of efficacy in fostering linkage and cooperation:

a Senators appointed by regional parliaments. There are 207 senators, directly elected by citizens. Additionally, each regional parliament is entitled to appoint one senator plus another one per million of inhabitants in its respective region (Spanish Constitution (SC) section ­69-5), adding up to 58 senators appointed by the regional parliaments. These appointed senators may be members of their respective regional parliament, although this is not compulsory (except for Cantabria, La Rioja and Madrid). The behaviour of these senators is no different from that of the 207 directly elected: They act by partisan criteria and vote according to their party’s instructions, rather than in territorial terms. In their everyday life, they are considerably detached from the regional parliament appointing them. And when a member of both legislatures, they are usually more devoted to their Senate duties to the detriment of their regional ones. On the other hand, their colleagues senators elected by citizens in the same region can take to the Chamber whatever initiative of interest for the region and interact with regional parliament members in their constituency. Therefore, this mechanism doesn’t provide the linkage and interaction effects it could, given the strength of political parties, with MPs of both, national and regional parliaments, following party lines much more than territorial ones, and

226  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

the lack of connection of appointed senators with their regional parliament (Navarro 2006). b Introduction of bills in the national parliament by regional parliaments. Very few countries vest regional parliaments with this competence, but Spain and Portugal do. In Spain, the regional parliaments have that initiative in subject areas beyond their legal competence or jurisdiction. After approval of the text by a majority in the regional parliament, three of its members defend the initiative in front of the Plenum of Congreso de los Diputados (CdlD). If accepted for consideration, the rest of the procedure is the same as that for any other bill at the CdlD and Senate. The interaction consists formally in defending the initiative in the other chamber, although such initiatives imply more informal interaction ­between both legislatures’ members and parties. This mechanism is not often used and, when so, it is seldom efficient. In fact, it would be much more fruitful to ask the Government or one of the parliamentary groups at the CdlD to present the initiative as if it was theirs. In many occasions, the regional parliament’s initiative is presented so the national legislature has to take a position on specific issues, or controversial ones (specially, when the party majority in the regional parliament is different to the national one): the aim being to get public attention on specific issues at national level. For example, in recent times some of these related to government’s austerity policy, other, more specific, aimed to declare a given area as a national park. In the 10th Congress (2011–2015), 20 of these regional bill initiatives were presented and none of them was accepted for consideration (11 were ­rejected, 4 postponed, 2 lapsed, and 3 withdrawn). These figures are similar to previous Congresses, even if there were more of these (42, 34 and 28, respectively, in the 7th, 8th and 9th Congresses). These figures are self-evident: Rather than efficient multi-level cooperation and interaction, this mechanism aims mainly to get national attention for regional issues or to contest national government policies. c Cooperation agreements between regions: In some cases, they have to be previously approved by the national parliament before being signed by the regions. This kind of cooperation between regional and national parliaments implies considerable informal interaction between both territorial levels, at least between the majorities in both legislatures, in order to get the agreements passed. The increase of different areas for cooperation between regions has raised the number of inter-­regional agreements sent by regional parliaments to the national one for approval (Ridaura 2009). d Regional parliaments’ proposals of Constitutional Court judges. The Senate appoints 4 of the 12 judges of the Constitutional Court.2 In order to take into account the regions’ opinion in those appointments, each of the 17 regional parliaments sends to the President of the Senate a

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  227

proposal of two names. After receiving those proposals, the appointments committee of the Senate presents the Plenum a shortlist of four names (that don’t need to include any of the 34 names suggested regionally). Given the proposals by regional parliaments are mostly driven by party lines, different parliaments suggest the same names according to intra-party coordination. This mechanism is another example in which intra-party coordination overrides potential linkages and cooperation initiatives between regional and national parliaments. e Revisions of the regional statutes or constitutions. Given the regional statutes belong to the so called “constitutional corpus”, their revision needs to be approved both by the regional and the national parliaments. Once approved in the regional parliament, a delegation of their members defends the proposal in front of the CdlD’s Plenum. If the proposal receives amendments in the CdlD’s Constitutional Committee, a joint committee (regional parliament and CdlD) is summed to agree a compromise. The revisions then go to the Senate for its approval. Once again, this linkage mechanism implies mainly informal interaction initiatives, although they are usually conducted through party lines.

In the case of Portugal, the possibility to create autonomous administrative regions was open by the Constitution. Their institutionalization was dependent of being voted by the majority of the Portuguese citizens in a referendum (Portuguese Constitution [PC], section 255–262). That consultation took place in 1998, but the electorate rejected the proposal to regionalize the country. Therefore, regionalization has never come to effect. As we’ve seen above, Portugal only has two autonomous regions: the archipelagos of Azores and Madeira. The cooperation and coordination links between national and regional bodies in both regions are constitutionally granted: The Constitution postulates that the national and regional bodies should cooperate in order to ensure the economic and social development of the autonomous regions, particularly aiming to correct inequalities derived from insularity. The regional political bodies are constituted by a legislative assembly, a regional government, and the regional public administration. They may legislate at the regional level or, through consent, on matters falling within the competence of the national Assembly of the Republic (AR). The scope of the legislative competence is limited, though. They are not able to legislate on matters such as the election of regional MPs, their own political-­ administrative statute, or the framework of regional finances. These are the responsibility of the AR. Besides their own executive competences, they also have regional tax and administrative competences. Furthermore, the regional government is accountable towards the regional legislative assembly (PC, section 225–234). In general, there is not a strong institutionalization of formal mechanisms of interaction between national and regional parliaments acknowledging significant autonomic powers to the latter, as

228  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

in Spain. Instead, there are a set of formal procedures and requirements which grant institutionally some integration of regional parliaments in ­national politics:

a The appointment of a representative of the Republic. Each of the autonomous regions has a representative of the Republic, who represents the national state, embodying the main formal linkage between national and regional parliaments. The representative of the Republic is appointed and exonerated by Portugal’s President of the Republic after consultation with the national government (PC, article 230), with their mandate lasting the duration of the President’s mandate. The formal competences underlying this position allow the national level to have relative control over political power at regional level. Mirroring national general elections’ processes, the president of the regional government is appointed by the representative of the Republic, taking into account the electoral results for the legislative assembly. The representative of the Republic also appoints and exonerates the members of the regional government, on the proposal of the respective president. More importantly, it is the responsibility of the representative of the Republic to sign and publish regional legislative decrees and regulatory decrees. The representative might veto these, triggering a new consideration of the bill. If the regional legislative assembly confirms the vote by an absolute majority, the bill goes through. Through this representative, the national parliament scrutinizes the production of regional legislation, constraining the effective autonomy of the regional assembly. Formally, the representative of the Republic uses their veto power discretionarily, taking into account their interpretation of the bills’ constitutionality. In practice, this somewhat reflects the game of political forces between the continent and the archipelagos. For instance, since 2007 the representative of the Republic of Azores vetoed seven regional decrees, triggering new considerations of these by the legislative assembly. Most of these vetoes occurred when the regional and national governments were from different political factions. No veto has been presented since 2014, when both governments have belonged to the same party.3

This position has lost political relevance, being gradually deprived of its competences since it was established in 1976. For example, it used to have a seat in the national cabinet whenever regional issues were discussed. Nowadays, the veto power is the most relevant competence, but also the most controversial one, so there is some regional pressure to eliminate this position. b Regional representation in the Council of State. Presidents of the regional governments have a seat in the national Council of State (PC, section 141–146). The Council of State is the President of the Republic’s political body of consultation, including representation of key

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  229

political figures (such as the President of the Assembly of the Republic, the Prime-­Minister, former presidents of the republic, among others). The Council’s main competences are to advise on the dissolution of the Assembly of the Republic and of the legislative assemblies of the autonomous regions, as well as on the government’s dismissal. Although the issues the Council advises on are very important, the fact this is a consultative council reduces its impact. Furthermore, the frequency of such consultations is quite low. Therefore, besides having a narrow scope and limited importance to foster regional/national cooperation, the fact that this Council is seldom mobilized hinders its relevance for the cooperation between regional and national levels. c Accountability of the regional assemblies and the representatives of the Republic towards the President of the Republic. Portugal has a ­semi- ­presidential system where the president has veto powers over ­parliament and government. These powers extend to the autonomous regions. Similarly to its power to dissolve the national legislature, the ­president has the competence to dissolve the legislative assemblies of the autonomous regions (provided that the Council of State and the parties represented therein have been previously consulted) (PC, sections 133–140). The president also has the power to appoint and dismiss the representatives of the Republic for the autonomous regions, under the ­government’s ­advice. Although of relevance, these powers are seldom used. An exception was the dissolution of the legislative assembly of Madeira in 2015. This decision was preceded by the exoneration of the president of the regional government and consequently the resignation of the regional government. The president’s dissolution of the assembly was, therefore, more of a formal requirement to elect a new government, than a political decision. d Regional initiative of national bills and referenda. As in Spain, Portuguese regional assemblies can initiate legislation in the national parliament (PC, section 161–170). As said before, this is an unusual competence for regional parliaments. According to the archive of the Assembly of the Republic, the regional assembly of Madeira has presented a total of 197 initiatives since 1976, and the regional assembly of Azores 87. Regional assemblies can also propose regional referenda (PC, article 115), but no regional referendum has taken place so far. e Relationship of the autonomous regions with the judiciary branch of the Republic. This is particularly important in relation to two courts: the Court of Accounts (Tribunal de Contas) and the Constitutional Court (Tribunal Constitucional), two core bodies of the Portuguese judicial system. The Court of Accounts is the supreme body to oversight the legality of public expenditure and the public accounts. The public accounts of the autonomous regions are therefore subject to its reviewing process (PC, article 214). The Constitutional Court reviews the constitutionality of legislation. The representatives of the Republic may submit to the

230  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

Constitutional Court requests to consider the constitutionality of any norm contained in a regional legislative decree (PC, section 277–283). The legislative assemblies of the autonomous regions, their presidents, the regional governments, or one tenth of the deputies of the respective legislative assembly, may also require the assessment of the constitutionality of laws, when the request is based on a claim of violation of the rights of the autonomous regions. These are formal linkages between the regional and national levels, reporting to the regular functioning of the judicial system and, therefore, relatively unimportant to strengthen the cooperation and coordination between both levels. f Revisions of the regional statutes. Finally, and similarly to Spain, revisions of regional statutes should be approved by both the regional and the national parliaments. The statutes can only be revised at the initiative of the regional legislative assembly, through the elaboration and approval of a draft sent to the AR. The revision of the statute is decided by an absolute majority of the deputies in the regional assemblies (PC, article 161). As in Spain, in practice this process is led through party lines. A recent example of the parties’ initiative to revise the statutes was that of a small left party (the BE, Left Bloc) presenting to the Legislative Assembly of the Azores, in April 2018, a proposal to revise the statute of the region, within the framework of the Parliamentary Commission for the Reform of Autonomy. This proposal addressed the need to improve the geostrategic position of the region and its participation in international treaties and was generally justified by the party as a way to increase the autonomy of the Azores region.

National and regional parliaments’ linkage through political parties’ vertical integration

Spanish parliamentary party groups (PPGs), both at national and regional parliaments, follow the general convergence tendency towards the (ultra)-integrated and parliamentary party complexes models of PPG (Heidar and Koole 2000: 10–14 and 259–262). A few number of leaders control all the activity of the group’s MPs and are closely linked to the external party organization (EPO). All PPGs share the same structure at the regional and at the national levels, which is controlled by the EPO. National and regional Spanish MPs are deeply dependant on their parliamentary party groups (both regarding their everyday work and their nomination for the following election). Given the high level of integration and control EPOs exert over their PPGs, political linkages and interdependences between national and regional parliaments can be traced by analysing the degree of vertical integration between the national and the regional organizations of each party. We focus on the four main Spanish statewide parties (Partido Popular [PP], Partido Socialista Obrero Español [PSOE], Ciudanos [C’s], and Podemos

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  231

[Pds]), leaving aside truncated ones (non-statewide parties)4 and United Left (which joined the Podemos lists at the last election). All of these parties are quite subordinate to the national leadership in key domains, even if formally the regional organizations enjoy a wide share of functional autonomy. Linkages and interdependences can be identified through a number of variables, (Thorlakson 2009, 2011; Pruysers 2014), but as Thorlakson (2011) suggested, vertical integration can be measured in three different dimensions: (a) the organizational structure; (b) the nature and functioning of cooperation and collaboration patterns regarding strategies and programs; and (c) ideology, principles, and values. Given the linkage between PPG and EPO, we extend this vertical integration to parliaments.

a At the organization structure level, all four national parties acknowledge in their statutes their multi-level organization structure, and the functional autonomy of their regional organizations. But there is evidence of a large number of linkages and interdependences between both levels in each party: Even if there are differences among PP, PSOE, Ciudadanos and Podemos, their national and regional organizations’ relationships share many relevant elements: names of the national and regional parties, their governing organization structures, the principles, the values and the general political positions contained in the national statutes, as well as the loyalty to the party-as-a-whole; membership (with a common census of members, with identical rights, duties, and fee; statutes and internal regulations); autonomy of the regional branches for the candidate selection, the coalition agreements, the electoral manifestos and the electoral strategies, even if the national governing bodies have a final say (except in Podemos); linkage of the national MPs to their party national bodies, and not to the regional ones that nominated them. b There is also clear evidence of strong vertical integration regarding patterns of ‘soft practices’ (Thorlakson 2009) of coordination and cooperation between national and regional organizations.5 Both upward and downward interactions occur, reinforcing the vertical integration provided by the formal organization structure factors in all four analysed parties: Sharing the regional offices and regional organization, and holding regular national and regional coordination meetings; integrating joint national and regional bodies (or national bodies where regional leaders hold a relevant number of seats); joint national and regional task forces to write the electoral programs or decide on electoral strategy plans; shared electoral polling and survey research, rallies, and endorsing campaigns; and money transfers upwards or downwards between national and regional organizations. Additionally, in all four parties, national leaders exert informal influence over the regional organizations, playing a key role in solving conflicts or appointing leaders, in spite of the formal autonomy of the regional organizations.6

232  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

Table 13.1  Congruence of ideological position in each party according to its voters in 17 regions, Spain

Podemos PSOE Ciudadanos PP

Position 1–10 scale 2.6 4.2 5.9 7.7 Standard deviation 0.29 0.35 0.18 0.31 Variation range in 17 regions (scale 1–10) 1.2 1.0 0.7 1.0

Source: Position of each party by its voters at the regional level. Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas (CIS) Poll number 3141, Pre-National Election December 2016, questions 14-a and 16 (www.cis.es).

c Shared ideology, principles, values, norms, and general political lines: party programs and manifestos are very similar in all 17 regions and are also similar to those approved at national level. This ideological congruence can be measured by how party voters in each region perceive the party in the ideological 1–10 scale, and the coherence with that same perception at the national level: The positions for each party are similar in all 17 regions, with small deviations from the national position. As Table 13.1 shows, the one with a more coherent ideological image among its voters is Ciudadanos, given it has two basic political messages since its national expansion in 2014: national unity and democratic renewal. But the other three parties also show considerable ideological coherence: the standard deviations of the regional positions are low, as is the variation range of those 17 measures. Each of these parties are one single political project, with basically the same principles, political platforms, policies orientation, and ideology.

Spanish political parties show therefore strong patterns of vertical interdependences, linkages, and interactions, which can be extended to their PPGs in the national and the regional parliaments. There is considerable evidence of that strong vertical integration at the three levels where it can be measured, according to previous findings (Thorlakson 2009, 2011): party structure, patterns of upward and downward cooperation, and identity. Nevertheless, that interdependence is not balanced, but settled as a mechanism of control from above (the national structures), in cohesive and centralized political parties, leaving little autonomy for the regional branches. And it is so to a larger extent after the reform of these four parties’ statutes carried out in 2017. Their PPGs follow the (vertical) integrated and parliamentary party complex models (Heidar and Koole 2000; Thorlakson 2009, 2011): Their leaderships are appointed by the party leadership, and their MPs follow leaderships’ political lines, strategies, and guidelines. As mentioned above, the national statutes of all these parties foresee and design a decentralized organization structure, although main decisions still depend on the central national governing bodies. We can measure the

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  233

degree of autonomy of the regional organizations have: “its capacity to act without constraint or interference from the federal [national] party” (Thorlakson 2009: 162, 2011: 717). Following Thorlakson (2011), in order to do so we can examine decision-making regarding coalitions, manifestos, and leaders and candidates’ selection. In all these four variables, the Spanish national parties allow for low levels of autonomy to their regional branches: The latter are entitled to make their own decisions concerning leaders’ selection (Ciudadanos is even more centralized: the national executive committee appoints the spokesperson and five members of the regional leadership; the PSOE executive committee ‘suggests’ the leader of the PPG to its members). But their proposals regarding candidates, electoral strategies and manifestos, and coalition agreements have to be later ratified (or changed) at the national level, and they always have to be in accordance with the party lines and principles approved by the national bodies. As we know since Schattschneider (1942: 64), “he who can make the nominations is the owner of the party”. Podemos is the only case in which the regional party decisions on these matters enjoy more autonomy, as long as the regional decisions don’t disagree with national party lines, principles, and strategies. In Portugal, parties control the candidate-selection process, selecting MP candidates for the party lists in a highly centralized process. Since regional parties are banned by the Constitution and MPs’ representative mandate is a national one, rather than constituency based, the institutional incentives for MPs to dissent regarding their party, or to converge with their voters in the constituency, are rather low. This is so because re-election as legislators or other party position is in essence dependent on party loyalty. The Portuguese case is not, however, different from that in Spain, and none of our cases are outliers in the Southern European context. Portugal along Greece, Italy, Spain, and Turkey are seen as having party dominated parliaments where MPs have little autonomy (Norton and Leston-Bandeira 2005). As at the national level, MPs elected by each party or coalition of ­parties in Azores or Madeira may form a parliamentary group and they have, alongside the regional government, the initiative of regional legislative decree in matters covered by political-administrative statute. According to the statutes of the two mainstream Portuguese political parties, the Socialist Party (PS) and the Social-Democratic Party (PSD), as well as of the smaller parties, Popular Party (CDS/PP) and the Left Bloc (BE), the organization of the parties in the autonomous regions of the Azores and Madeira is endowed with autonomy, statutes, and their own bodies. In some cases, the statutes formally foresee some kind of regional accountability towards the party national bodies. This is the case of the BE, whose statutes explicitly contemplate that the party’s regional organization is accountable towards the party national governing bodies. The PSD also makes the amendment of the statutes dependent on the ratification by national party bodies. Differently, regarding the Communist Party, the statutes only

234  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

provide the existence of a regional assembly, also called regional congress, in each autonomous region, which is responsible for defining the guidelines for the respective autonomous region. The national/regional articulation is generally done by the representation of regional party members in the parties’ national bodies, as well as by hearing the regional bodies when regional issues are at stake. The parties’ regional organization aims to respond to the geographical and political-administrative constraints arising from insularity. Nevertheless, they remain the arms of national parties, thus to a great extent contributing to the centralization of the political decision-making and constraining regional autonomy.

Vertical integration at the MP level

Vertical integration must also be measured at the MP level. This can be done in different ways, such as examining individuals’ multi-level trajectories (both as party officials and as elected representatives) and their interactions (contacts and meetings with ‘the other’ level) (Pruysers 2014). In this respect, there are data available only for the Spanish case. In Spain, regional and national parliamentarians share personal and political characteristics (Oñate 2018a; Oñate and Viera 2018). Some of these relate to their previous multi-level political experience and trajectories, as party and public officials. This previous experience at other levels provides them with a wider vision and experience which enhances the vertical integration of parliaments. As Table 13.2 shows, nearly two-thirds of the members of CdlD elected in 2016 had previous experience as party official at the regional level, whereas a bit less than one-third of them had that experience at the national level (Oñate 2018a). More than 75 per cent of PP and PSOE national MPs had that previous experience in the regional party. In that election, Ciudadanos and Podemos were elected for the first time to the regional and national parliaments, with their candidates not having previous political experience as public officials, given they claimed being the “new”

Table 13.2  Multi-level previous political experience of national and regional MPs (2015 and 2016 national and regional elections)

Members of Congreso de los Diputados

Members of regional parliaments

Level of experience Region Nation Region Nation

Party officials 72.3 31.1 58.0 21.0 Appointed public officials 19.7 12.8 19.0 5.3 Elected representatives 23.7 42.6* 36.6* 7.7

Source: Oñate (2018a) for members of Congreso de los Diputados, and Oñate and ­Viera (2018) for regional parliaments members. (*) The “new” parties, Podemos and ­Ciudadanos, run in 2015–2016 for the first time, so their MPs had not been MPs before.

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  235

parties, vis a vis the “old” status quo professional ones. Interestingly, a significant number of their national MPs were party officials at the regional level when they got their seats at the CdlD: 66 per cent of Ciudadanos MPs and more than 60 per cent in the case of Podemos. This indicates these parties were not that new, nor that different. They quickly fitted into the general trend of being “professional insiders” or “political party-centred professionals” who have a previous trajectory in their party organization (Cotta and Best 2000: 523). As could be expected, fewer members of the regional parliaments elected in the 2015 and 2016 elections had that kind of party experience. Still, more than half of them had been party officials at the regional level before getting their seat in 2015–2016, whereas a bit more than one-fifth had had a position in the national party structure prior to their election in 2015–2016 (Table 13.2). Although the figures regarding previous experience as an appointed public official at the ‘other’ level are lower, a significant number of MPs had had that experience before getting their seat in 2015–2016: Nearly one in five national MPs had it (23 per cent among PP’s MPs and 35 per cent among PSOE’s). Only slightly more than 5 per cent of regional MPs had that previous experience at the national level before getting their seat in 2015–2016 in their regional parliament. The figures are a bit higher regarding previous experience as an MP at the parliament at the ‘other’ level ­(Table 13.2): nearly one in four members of CdlD had previously been regional MPs when elected in 2016 (35 per cent and 23 per cent among PP’s and PSOE’s MPs, respectively). And still almost 8 per cent of regional MPs did have previous experience in the national parliament. In spite of the party system change in 2015 and 2016 elections, these figures regarding MPs’ multi-level trajectories are not that different from those of previous Legislatures (Oñate 2018b). These “multi-level MPs” contribute with their previous experience, networks, knowledge, and attitudes to strengthening the vertical integration of parliaments in multi-layered political systems and to socializing their MPs colleagues in the multi-level institutional organization culture. Besides the multi-level MPs’ trajectories and background, MPs develop interactions with the ‘other’ level MPs in their everyday political activity. These contacts (meetings, telephone conversations or other kind of interactions) are indeed a relevant mechanism to increase the vertical integration between parliaments in multi-level political systems. As Table 13.3 shows, Spanish regional MPs often interact with national authorities regarding their parliamentary business: More than one-third of them talk more than once a week with members of their own national party leadership; nearly half of them do so with national MPs regarding their committee business; and nearly two-thirds of regional MPs talk more than once a week with their own party national MPs elected at their same district or region (more than one-third of them do so more than twice per week).

236  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

Table 13.3  Frequency of regional MPs’ conversations (meetings/telephone) with national authorities

Less once/ week Once-Twice/ week More twice/week

Members of their national party leadership 64.5 13.5 21.9 Members of national executive and ministries public officials 90.4 3.9 2.1

Members of Congreso de los Diputados (for their committee business) 52.2 30.6 17.2

Members of Congreso de los Diputados from their own party and district/ region (*)

36.1 28.7 35.2

Source: CONREP-2. Own conducted survey to MPs of Andalusia, Cantabria, Valencia, ­Murcia, Navarra, and Basque Country regional Legislatures (fieldwork: March-June, 2016; N = 413). (*) Districts or electoral constituencies are the same for regional and national (except for Murcia region; in next regional election, the district will be the same as the one used in national elections).

Most Spanish regional MPs are aware of the relevance of the other levels of government and find the interactions kept with national authorities useful for their different activities in their everyday representative work. There are no significant differences in their usefulness in regards to each kind of activities, as Figure 13.1 shows. Still, MPs find these contacts more useful regarding their relations with society and their law-making activity (6.8 and 6.7, as a standardized mean, respectively, being 1 not useful and 10 very useful). Most Spanish regional MPs report that meetings kept with national MPs elected at their own districts/region were arranged by MPs (either themselves or the national ones), whereas one-third say the meetings were institutionally and periodically fixed. When the result of MPs’ initiative, usually it is mainly initiated by regional MPs: nearly three quarters report they usually ask for the meeting (whereas only 9 per cent say it is more frequent that the meeting is a consequence of the national MPs’ initiative). Anyway, more than half of the Spanish regional MPs consider the frequency of contacts they keep with their national counterparts good enough, seeing no need to increase it. Nevertheless, 46 per cent thinks it would be good to increase those contacts and meetings with their national colleagues. It seems, therefore, that there is quite a high intensity of contacts and linkages between individual MPs from both levels of governance, although for quite a number of regional MPs there is still room for improvement. Nevertheless, being aware of the relevance of the ‘other’ level of governance and the usefulness those contacts for the regional everyday activity doesn’t seem to make them more inclined to move to the national parliament. When asked where they would like to be in five years’ time, one-third of regional MPs see themselves away from active politics; one-third says

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  237

they would like to go on being a regional MP; and only 5 per cent reports they would like to be a national MP. These figures are similar to the number of national MPs with previous experience as regional MPs.

Conclusion

This chapter aimed to analyse the connections between national and regional parliaments in Spain and Portugal. Given the lack of an appropriate framework to study parliaments’ multi-level relationships (beyond Heidar and Koole 2000), we borrowed analytical categories from the literature on political parties and explored those linkages from the point of view of parliaments’ vertical integration, understood as multi-level interdependences, linkages, and interactions (Smiley 1987; Dyck 1991; Thorlakson 2009, 2011; Pruysers 2014). Given Spain and Portugal have a dissimilar multi-level structure, we analysed vertical interaction in three different dimensions: (a) institutional formal mechanisms for vertical integration (macro-level);

0

5

10

15

20

25

% of MPs surveyed

Not at all useful

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Very useful

Usefulness of interaction between national-regional MPs

Law Making Government Oversight

Relations with Society Relations with Authorities

Figure 13.1  Usefulness of interaction between regional-national MPs, according to regional MPs’ different representation activities. Source: CONREP-2. Own conducted survey to MPs of Andalusia, Cantabria, Valencia, ­Murcia, Navarra, and Basque Country regional Legislatures (fieldwork: March-June, 2016; N = 413).

238  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

(b) political parties’ mechanisms for vertical integration (meso-level), differentiating three levels: organization structure, cooperation and coordination patterns, and ideology and principles (Thorlakson 2011); (c) individual MPs vertical integration interactions (micro-level). The formalized institutional mechanisms don’t seem very effective in either country, due to their early poor design (their regulation was not adapted to the development of decentralization) and political parties’ dominant role, as party lines interfere in those institutional instruments and prevent them from working in a real multi-level way. Contrary to this, both in Spain and Portugal, political parties are very efficient instruments for parliaments’ vertical integration: their almighty role embeds their high degree of strong vertical integration into parliaments. Finally, at the individual MP multi-level dimension, evidence also shows considerable vertical integration in Spain, both regarding their political profiles or trajectories, and their interactions with MPs from the other level. Although vertical integration in multi-layered political systems can be positive to enhance effective governance democratic patterns, it can also be used as “a means of control and intervention from the centre”, as Thorlakson put it (2009: 173). Judging from the way political parties drive their vertical relationships (and the direction of the 2017 reform of the Spanish main political parties’ statutes), the latter seems to be the case in the Iberian parliaments. Further research is necessary in this field, to set a comprehensive theoretical framework, suitable for a deeper understanding of national and regional parliaments (and MPs’) interaction in multi-layered systems. It would also enable explaining how these interactions and interdependencies affect the respective parliamentarian elites (national and regional MPs), and how these institutions interact with political parties in that vertical integration. That framework would benefit from drawing from several sources and building from the merge of literature on parliamentary party groups (updating the seminal book edited by Heidar and Koole 2000) and parliaments’ organization, federalism, and contributions on multi-level party organizations and vertical integration. At the same time, empirical cross-country analysis would improve the comparative approach in this field, certainly still understudied.

Notes

1 Their electoral systems are similar (electoral districts magnitude is usually larger at the regional level, but most of the districts are the same provincial ones). 2 The other eight are appointed by the Congreso de los Diputados (4), the Government (2) and the Judicial Power General Council (2). 3 See the listing of vetoes at: www.representantedarepublica-acores.pt/Re­pre­ sentante-da-República/Vetos. 4 Most of the relationships between non-statewide parties and the party in national government are conducted in the executive’s bilateral negotiations, with decisions being referred to parliament for mere formal approval. Given they entail non-vertical integration relationships, we do not focus on these here.

Relationship between regional and national parliaments  239

5 Nevertheless, the intensity and main direction (upwards or/and downwards) of these cooperation patterns may depend on a wide variety of factors: ­party’s electoral results in each territory, strength of the respective leadership, ­being in government or opposition in each level, type of government (majority or coalition, support for the government in the national and in the regional parliaments). 6 Several examples could be mentioned: PP’s national president, Mariano Rajoy, decided upon who the new regional party and government presidents would be in Madrid after one had to resign due to public scandals, when formally this should have been decided by the regional party; Podemos’ national secretary general, Pablo Iglesias, put an end (beyond his formal powers) to a conflict between regional leaders in Madrid regarding the primaries process to select regional candidates).

References

Braga da Cruz, M. (1988). “Sobre o Parlamento português: partidarização parlamentar e parlamentarização partidária”. Análise Social 100, 97–125. Cotta, M. and Best, H. (eds.) (2000). Parliamentary Representatives in Europe,

­1848–2000. Legislative Recruitment and Careers in Eleven European Countries. ­Oxford: Oxford University Press. Deschouwer, K. (2003). “Political Parties in Multi-Layered Systems”. European

­Urban and Regional Studies 10, 213–226. Duverger, M. (1954). Political Parties: Their Organization and Activity in the Modern State. New York: Wiley. Dyck, R. (1991). “Links Federal and Provincial Parties and Party Systems”. In Barkvis, H. (ed.) Representation, Integration and Political Parties in Canada. ­Toronto: Dundern Press, 129–177. Heidar, K. and Koole, R. (eds.) (2000). Parliamentary Party Groups in European Democracies. Political Parties behind Closed Doors. London: Routledge. Hopkin, J. (2003). “Political Decentralization, Electoral Change and Party Organization Adaptation: A Framework for Analysis”. European Urban and Regional Studies 10, 227–238. Janda, K. (1980). Political Parties: A Cross-National Survey. New York: Free Press. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2009). “Dissent in a Party-Based Parliament: The Portuguese Case”. Party Politics 15(6), 695–713. Lobo, M. C., Costa Pinto, A. and Magalhães, P. (2012). “The Political Institutions of Portuguese Democracy”. In Royo, S. (ed.) Portugal in the Twenty-First Century. Lanham: Lexington Books, 23–48. Navarro, J. C. (2006). “La iniciativa legislativa de los parlamentos autonómicos ante el parlamento estatal”, in Ridaura, M. J. (ed.) Representación política y parlamentarismo multinivel. Valencia: Tirant lo Blanch: 101–122. Norton, P. and Leston-Bandeira, C. (2005). “The Impact of Democratic Practice on the Parliaments of Southern Europe”. In Leston-Bandeira, C. (ed.) Southern European Parliaments in Democracy. London and New York: Routlegde, 177–185. Oñate, P. (1999). “Parlamento, grupos parlamentarios y partidos. Los partidos políticos en el Congreso de los Diputados”. In Martínez, A. (ed.) El Congreso de los Diputados en España: Funciones y rendimiento. Madrid: Tecnos, 95–140. Oñate, P. (2008). “Los partidos políticos en la España democrática”. In Jiménez de Parga, M. and Vallespín, F. (eds.) España Siglo XXI: la Política, Madrid: Sistema, 617–643.

240  Pablo Oñate and Ana Maria Belchior

Oñate, P. (2018a). “Los parlamentarios del Congreso de los Diputados tras las elecciones generales de 2015 y 2016: pautas de continuidad y de cambio”. In Llera, F., Baras, M. and Montabes, J. (eds.) Las elecciones generales de 2015 y 2016. Madrid: Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas, 415–436. Oñate, P. (2018b). “Political Elites and Professional Careers of MPs in Multi-Level Spain”. In Lachapelle, G. and Oñate, P. (eds.) Federalism, Devolution and ­Multi-Level Government. London: Burdich Publishers, 245–258. Oñate, P. and Delgado, I. (2006). “Grupos parlamentarios, partidos y diputados en las Asambleas Legislativas Autonómicas”. In Oñate, P. (ed.) Organización y funcionamiento de los Parlamentos Autonómicos. Valencia: Tirant lo Blanch, 135–172. Oñate, P. and Viera, A. (2018). “Los perfiles de las elites parlamentarias tras las elecciones autonómicas de 2015 y 2016: nuevas caras, viejas tendencias”. In Lagares, N., Ortega, C. and Oñate, P. (eds) Las elecciones autonómicas de 2015 y 2016. Madrid: Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas, 389–408. Pruysers. (2014). “Reconsidering Vertical Integration: An Examination of National Political Parties and Their Counterparts in Ontario”. Canadian Journal of Political Science 47(2), 237–258. Ridaura, M. J. (2009). Relaciones intergubernamentales Estado-Comunidades Autónomas. Valencia: Tirant lo Blanch. Schattschneider, E. (1942), Party Government. New York: Farrar and Rinehart. Smiley, D. (1987). The Federal Condition in Canada. Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson. Thorlakson, L. (2003). “Comparing Federal Institutions: Power and Representation in Six Federations”. West European Politics 26, 1–22. Thorlakson, L. (2009). “Patterns of Party Integration, Influence and Autonomy in Seven Federations”. Party Politics 15(2), 157–177. Thorlakson, L. (2011). “Measuring Vertical Integration in Parties with Multi-level Systems Data”. Party Politics 19(5), 713–734.

Constitutional Court and Parliament in Spain: ways of interaction and current problems

Background and appointment mechanism

In 1978, Spain opted for a centralized model of judicial review of legislation echoing several European states that already had experience with this model.2 Several reasons justified this choice, inter alia, it was alleged at the time that a constitutional court that centralized judicial review of legislation would: ensure legal certainty; enhance democratic legitimacy vis-à-vis the existing ordinary bureaucratic judicial power; bring specialized expertise to complex constitutional challenges; and entrust to a novel institution, selected by the newly constituted powers, the protection of the Spanish Constitution (SC hereafter), instead of relying on the bygone judicial power bequeathed by the former Franco dictatorship (Ferreres Comella 2013: 215–216). The 1978 Constitution was the result of a complex bargaining process between all political forces after a long dictatorship (Ferreres Comella 2013: 12–24). In these complex negotiations, the idea of reaching a “consensus” on the foundation of the new constitutional regime was paramount. Therefore, the Constitution was left open in a few issues. Some relevant matters were agreed in principle, but not in detail. In the context of this open-ended constitutional text, the Spanish Constitutional Court (SCC) had a key role, particularly in the 1980s, in consolidating and building the core constitutional values of democracy, fundamental rights and political decentralisation enshrined in the Constitution. Hence, the SCC was called to define and develop the “consensual” spirit of the constitutional text. The 1978 Constitution adhered to the predominant postwar European continental constitutionalism and created a standard Constitutional Court.3 The SCC is composed of 12 members, all prestigious jurists from a variety of backgrounds – judges, prosecutors, professors, public officials, lawyers – with at least 15 years’ experience. The Parliament elects eight members – four by the Congress and four by the Senate – with a majority of three-fifths. Furthermore, the Government selects two and the General Council of the Judiciary elects the remaining two.

14 Constitutional Courts and national Parliaments in Spain and Portugal1

Nuno Garoupa, Joan Solanes Mullor and Teresa Violante

242  Nuno Garoupa et al.

The Parliament has a pivotal role in the selection of members. In Congress, rules demand a qualified majority parliamentary majority, which forces dominant parties to coalesce with, at least, the opposition minority party leaders. The Senate elects four SCC members. In 2007, the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court was amended to enable the autonomous communities (CCAA henceforth) assemblies to nominate candidates to fill these four positions. However, the Senate’s difficulty in fully accommodating the CCAA’s interests owing to the shortfalls in its constitutional design and the weakening of the CCAA assemblies’ nomination powers due to a later SCC decision have limited the influence of regional interests in the selection of constitutional judges. Ultimately, these regions’ capacity to shape the Court’s direction is restrained. Candidates are subject to a parliamentary hearing in which their credentials and competencies are scrutinised. In practice, however, the hearing filter differs from the strict control exercised in other legal systems (Ferreres Comella 2013: 217). In several recent SCC renewals, reaching an agreement on candidates has been an arduous process, delaying appointments and forcing judges whose terms had expired to fill the vacancies until the newly elected judges took office. Consequently, the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court was amended in 2010 and now provides a shorter term to be served by judges whose appointments were delayed. Despite the low importance of parliamentary hearings and the deadlocks in recent appointments, the Parliament’s influence on the election of SCC members looms large. Such influence arguably heightens its democratic legitimacy, particularly when the Constitutional Court has to review the constitutionality of statutes coming from the Parliament itself. The same applies to the position of the assemblies of the autonomous communities whose statutes are also subject to the judicial review. Apart from the appointment process, the Parliament’s influence is limited. The SCC members are independent and irremovable during their nine- year tenure in office. SCC judges have the same status of independence as the ordinary judicial power and can only be removed for a good reason. To be sure, the incompatibilities regime forbids SCC judges from exercising, for example, a representative function or a managerial role in a political party, which reinforces the strict separation between the Parliament and the SCC. The Parliament, in relation to the elected judges, partially renews the judges by thirds every three years and, therefore, there is a link between the composition of the SCC and parliamentary majorities. Ultimately, the SC establishes a dynamic doctrine of separation of powers – checks and balances - whereby the different powers interact and control each other – through the Parliament’s power over the appointment of SCC judges, for instance – even if each branch operates separately and independently. Against this institutional framework, which combines interdependence and autonomy in the relationship between the Parliament and the SCC, the latter undertakes its functions as a supreme interpreter of the Constitution. The SCC exercises constitutional review of legislation, that is, it controls the

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  243

adequacy of parliamentary statutes – and other sources of law with the same rank, including some norms approved by the executive branch and international treaties – within the scope of the constitution, either regarding norms protecting fundamental rights or in reference to other substantive constitutional provisions. The CCAA statutes are also subject to constitutional review by the SCC. Through the review of these statutes, together with national law, the SCC exercises its second most important function: as a referee of conflicts of competence between different levels of government. The SCC has been a critical player in this field because of the open-ended constitutional model of territorial organisation and the complex system of distribution of powers between the central government and the CCAA – with shared competences as a critical mechanism. The Basque Country, Catalonia and Galicia have been the most active CCAA in bringing territorial conflicts to the SCC.4 On exercising these competencies, the SCC can declare unconstitutional the statutory provision under examination, a declaration with erga omnes (i.e. towards all) effects that may eliminate the provision from the legal system. The SCC, therefore, in reviewing legislation against the constitution, acts as a check to the Parliament and constitutes itself as a veto player. However, the role of the Parliament varies, depending on different constitutional procedures envisaged by the SC to promote constitutional review of legislation.

Constitutional litigation

The constitutional challenge in abstract review (recurso de inconstitucionalidad) can be filed by the President of the Government, the Ombudsperson, 50 Congress members, 50 Senators, the executives or the assemblies of the CCAA. Although this mechanism is also in the hands of the majorities and the executive, the constitutional challenge is specifically designed to bolster parliamentary minorities – 50 congress members or 50 senators – and allow their concerns to statutes passed by the majorities to be echoed, which may trigger unconstitutionality claims. Practice reveals that more constitutional challenges were lodged during periods of absolute majority, reinforcing the idea of a mechanism in the hands of parliamentary minorities (Ferreres ­Comella 2013: 228). The CCAA executives and assemblies may also file a constitutional challenge in abstract review when central statutory law breaches their competences. However, CCAA actions challenged by the President of the Government can be automatically suspended at the President’s request, but not vice versa. This is a procedural advantage for the central government that has been often employed over time. As the constitutional challenge is an ex post abstract control mechanism, the legitimate actors can only file the challenge once the statute has been enacted and has entered into force, within three months after its publication in the Official Gazette of the Spanish State (BOE).5 The only exception to the ex post nature of the constitutional challenge is the preventive review of the CCAA Statutes of Autonomy, the highest laws of these regions. It is still abstract control but in the form of a preventive constitutional challenge.6

244  Nuno Garoupa et al.

Ordinary judges in the exercise of their jurisdictional function can raise the constitutional question (cuestión de inconstitucionalidad). When a statute or equivalent source of law is decisive for the outcome of the case, if the judge has cast doubts on the constitutionality of the relevant provision and all possible interpretations to make it compatible with the Constitution have been exhausted, then a constitutional question can be filed in the form of concrete control. In a centralised model of constitutional review of legislation such as the Spanish one, ordinary judges cannot directly disapply statutory law – unlike infra-statutory law, which can be directly disapplied – contrary to the Constitution. Therefore, they must suspend the ongoing procedure and raise a constitutional question to the SCC. The design of the constitutional question seeks to preserve legislation and, therefore, the Parliament’s democratic legitimacy vis-à-vis the non-elected ordinary judiciary. Judicial review of legislation is reserved to the SCC, a specialised institution with indirect democratic legitimacy due to the election of their members by the political branches of government. The review of the constitutionality of international treaties receives special treatment. Ex post control is possible through the constitutional challenge mechanism, but there is also an ex ante mechanism to analyse the compatibility of a treaty with the Constitution before it is ratified. This preventive tool may be used – it is not mandatory – by the Government, the Congress and the Senate. The SCC must review the treaty in light of substantive constitutional norms, while also taking into account the formal rules for ratifying a treaty where the Parliament’s role is crucial in case its approval requires an absolute or simple majority. In this sense, this procedural channel is vital to ensure the appropriate reaction from the Parliament in safeguarding its role in the ratification process of international treaties. However, the decision to trigger the preventive review is in the hands of the plenary of each chamber: minorities are not in charge of the procedure, which may jeopardise their position. Finally, the individual complaint (recurso de amparo) is considered a mechanism of concrete review by which individuals can act when some fundamental rights protected by the SCC are violated. This subsidiary mechanism, which can only be initiated once all ordinary jurisdictional remedies have been completed, can be used against a chain of judgements that do not redress the violation of fundamental rights by public authorities. Most individual complaints target judicial decisions, administrative actions or, at most, general administrative rules, when the violation is not due to legislative action. If the violation is identified at the legislative level, the constitutional issue is dealt with by the SCC en banc – the chamber handling the individual complaint will have to suspend the process. The plenary of the SCC will issue a judgement that the chamber will subsequently use to resolve the individual complaint. This particular procedure is a guarantee to the Parliament, whose legislative action will only be analysed by the court en banc and not by a small section-chamber of the SCC. Within this institutional and procedural framework, the SCC has exercised its functions and developed its relationship with the legislature. In this

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  245

regard, the SCC’s role has several shortfalls. Beyond improving the appointment process – to give teeth to the hearings and overcome deadlocks – the SCC’s action has been criticised on several grounds. First, the slowness of processes, which may last up to ten years, meaning, more often than not, that the unconstitutionality declaration is well overdue, frequently when there are different majorities in Parliament.7 Second, in high-profile political cases, as the Catalan independence crisis has made vividly clear, the SCC has been perceived as a politicised institution influenced by political parties, thus losing its standing as an independent court.8 Third, some autonomous communities do not feel comfortable with the power of influence and representation inside the SCC, which results in the devaluation of the legitimacy of the SCC’s role as a referee in conflicts of competences within the CCAA framework. Fourth, in the aftermath of the economic and financial crisis, the SCC has faced criticism because of its role before austerity measures. Its case law has shown two main trends. On the one hand, it has been very deferential to the legislator, deciding to push constitutional social rights into the background and, on the other hand, it has reinforced the powers of the central government vis-à-vis CCAA. Finally, having been focused on technical matters, the SCC should become more involved in substantive issues and, thus, play a more active role as a counter-majoritarian institution (Ferreres Comella 2013: 229–230).

Constitutional Court and Parliament in Portugal: from interaction to conflict9

Background and appointment mechanisms

In its original 1976 version, the Portuguese Constitution (PC henceforth) spread the competencies for constitutionality review between two bodies: the Comissão Constitucional (Constitutional Commission), tasked with concrete review, and the Conselho da Revolução (Council of Revolution), in charge of abstract control. Ex ante review and the review of unconstitutionality by legislative omission were also introduced. The exclusive competence for abstract review (ex ante, ex post and by legislative omission) was conferred upon the Council of Revolution, a military body that provided tutelage to the political transition to democracy. The Council of Revolution was also competent to declare the unconstitutionality of a legal norm with general binding force ensuing at least three unconstitutionality decisions delivered by the Constitutional Commission on concrete judicial disputes. A full-fledged system of constitutional review was only introduced in the context of the first constitutional revision in 1982, with the creation of the Constitutional Court10 (PCC) and the extinction of both the Council of ­Revolution and the Constitutional Commission. Despite the creation of the PCC, the mixed control system, combining diffuse concrete control with an abstract centralised model, remained in place. Portuguese judicial review hybrid system is one of the legacies of the

246  Nuno Garoupa et al.

transitional period that preceded the consolidation of democracy. Accordingly, this system entails concrete control by the PCC and all other courts, even courts of arbitration since they are all competent to disapply unconstitutional norms. In order to guarantee the uniformity of constitutional interpretation and the role of the PCC as the last (and specific) instance of constitutional jurisdiction, both the PC and the law have set forth a mandatory appeal for the Public Prosecutor in case an ordinary court disapplies a norm on the grounds of its unconstitutionality or fails to follow a previous unconstitutionality ruling delivered by the Constitutional Court.11

The PCC is composed of 13 judges, all of them with a law educational background. The Parliament elects ten judges whilst the remaining three are co-opted amongst themselves. There is a two-thirds majority requirement for a parliamentary approval of judges, which induces a consensus-based nomination process. If anything, because a single party alone is not able to select and vote a judge. Since September 2007, the parliamentary election of constitutional judges has been preceded by hearings. Although the hearings have not been introduced explicitly for the PCC members, their importance and public impact have grown with time. Like the Spanish case, public hearings of judicial candidates are not as important as other systems, for example, the United States. However, the Portuguese Parliament has increasingly taken seriously these opportunities to confront the future constitutional judges with their stances regarding matters of judicial philosophy and constitutional interpretation. The appointment process is grounded on gentlemen’s agreement between the two major political parties (Socialist Party – PS and Social Democratic Party – PSD) dating back to 1982 (Araújo 1997). The two major parties share the same number of appointees. Traditionally, PS deferred to the Communist Party (PCP) the choice of one judge whilst the PSD deferred to the smaller Centre Democrats (CDS) the choice of another. After the 2015 general election, the Left Bloc (BE) chose one of the constitutional judges, a fact that was received with public animosity by the PCP. Recent changes in government dynamics (see Fernandes et al. 2018) might mean that the Socialists will defer to extreme-left parties the choice of two (rather than just one) constitutional judges in the future. Constitutional judges are independent and can only be removed from office in case they accept a position or undertake an action which is incompatible with the fulfilment of their legal duties or dismissal or compulsory retirement following a disciplinary or criminal procedure. They cannot hold any duties in political parties or related institutions, nor be involved in any political or party activities of a public nature. Furthermore, during their term, any formal affiliation with political parties or associations is automatically suspended under the law. The judges are appointed to nineyear non-renewable mandates and enjoy the same status of standard career judges in regular courts of law. The PCC meets in en banc plenary sessions and sections or chambers, depending on the competencies it exercises.

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  247

The core competence of the PCC is to verify the constitutionality (and some illegalities) of legal norms. The PC and legislation also assign a vast array of other competencies to the PCC.12 On what concerns explicitly the Assembly of the Republic and the Legislative Assemblies of the Autonomous Regions, the PCC is competent to adjudicate, on final appeal, electoral claims and appeals on internal parliamentarian elections, as well as to rule on appeals filed by MPs concerning their loss of mandate. The PCC is also competent to rule on national and regional referenda proposals as well as to control the financial accounts of parliamentary groups, single MPs or independent MPs. Decisions adopted by the PCC are binding to all public and private entities and prevail over all other courts and authorities. This is particularly relevant concerning the PCC competences on constitutional review of legislation. Such review may relate to concrete review, abstract review or omission review.

Constitutional litigation

Concrete review of legislation takes the form of an appeal of constitutionality (recurso de constitucionalidade) that arises in a concrete legal dispute. It is filed by one of the litigants or, in some cases, by the Public Prosecutor’s Office even if it is not part of the dispute. According to the PC, all the judges shall refuse to apply unconstitutional norms. This stands in contrast with the typical Kelsenian-system that rests upon a reference from the ordinary judge to the Constitutional Court. In Portugal, the abstract review system is centralised, that is, only the PCC has the competence to abstract constitutional review of legislation. However, concrete review is diffuse (i.e. decentralised) in that all judges have the power to deliver a ruling on the constitutionality of legislation. Such decision, unless appealed against, becomes final and binding. The PCC has been framed as a typical Kelsenian-like court with some specificities that last up to this day. The most striking distinctive feature of the Portuguese system is that rulings delivered by the PCC on concrete review only have inter partes effect, restricted to the dispute where the appeal emerges. Erga omnes (i.e. towards all) effects of unconstitutionality decisions are only ascribed to abstract review decisions. In the case of three or more concrete unconstitutionality decisions, the court may also deliver a declaration of unconstitutionality at the request of the Public Prosecutors or one of the justices. The role of concrete review in the formal sources of law is limited and indirect. Importantly, it is fair to say that there is hardly any interaction between the PCC and the Parliament whenever concrete review comes to play. In most cases, the object of review is not the norm on its face, but a concrete judicial interpretation related to the normative semantic force of the legal provision. Whatever the theories of interpretation and separation of powers one may adopt, these situations do not concern a direct relationship between the court and the legislator, be it in the form of a dialogue or a direct

248  Nuno Garoupa et al.

conflict. This feature stands for a relative uniqueness of the Portuguese system of constitutionality review bringing it closer, on what concerns concrete review, to the decentralised American model of judicial review. The focal task of the PCC is the review of constitutionality, which is restricted to legislation. Indeed, the PCC does not have the powers to review other acts of public power, such as judicial decisions or administrative acts. Like the Italian case, there is no mechanism such as the Spanish recurso de amparo or the German Verfassungsbeschwerde. Being exclusively normative in its judicial review competencies, the PCC has however extended its powers to review the constitutionality of legal norms on not only its face but also following the concrete interpretation given by the a quo court. This judicial development of the object of review has enhanced, in practice, the court’s competencies bringing it closer, in some situations, to scrutinize the constitutionality of judicial decisions. The system of abstract review is quite generous on comparative terms. For one, it grants several institutions the power to request the intervention of the PCC. These institutions comprise both legal and political litigants who can employ this power to constrain the course of politics. In this regard, it is particularly relevant the power of the President of the Republic who can initiate proceedings regarding all types of constitutional review and holds the main request powers regarding ex ante reviews on national legislation as we will see below. These powers are per the semi-presidential character of the Portuguese regime and may enhance the PCC’s role as a veto player (Magalhães 2001). Additionally, the Portuguese system does not set forth any time-frame limit on the possibility to request the constitutionality review. It is, therefore, a powerful weapon against not only contemporary majorities, but also any piece of legislation. The system of sources of law is therefore always subject to a possible veto by the PCC in case it is requested to intervene by any of the multiple institutions competent to draw such request. Abstract review may take place before the legislative process has been completed (ex ante review) or afterwards (ex post or successive review). The ex ante review can only be requested by the President of the Republic (or one of the Representatives of the Republic in the autonomous regions if a regional autonomy concern is at stake). This procedure may be triggered to review the constitutionality of international treaties or agreements as well as any statutory bill that has been referred for ratification. In the case of provisions entailed in bills that shall be enacted as organic laws, the Prime-­ Minister and one-fifth of MPs may also request the ex ante review. Several legal and political actors, including parliamentarians, may request ex post abstract review. As far as these are concerned, both the President of the Parliament and one-tenth of MPs may trigger the control procedure. Control of unconstitutionality by legislative omission cannot be triggered by any parliamentarian. Furthermore, findings of unconstitutionality by the Constitutional Court are not binding upon the legislator.

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  249

Unconstitutionality rulings under ex post abstract review have general binding force whereas under ex ante review they have the mere force of a pronouncement for the unconstitutionality, something that the legislator may overcome if a strengthened majority re-enacts the bill (to today, this only happened once in a case concerning regional legislation). Formally, and apart from the parliamentary election of constitutional judges, the PCC and the Parliament have no direct interaction. The Parliament chooses the members of the court but, once elected, the justices are independent and do not take ownership from the political forces that appointed them. Moreover, apart from the possibility of overcoming a pronouncement of unconstitutionality in the case of an ex ante review, there are no other formal mechanisms that may allow for a dialogue through constitutional review between the PCC and the legislator. Considering that such mechanism has only been used once (in case of a regional bill), its theoretical relevance lacks empirical strength. Furthermore, article 282 PC regulating the effects of the unconstitutionality decisions under abstract review seems to rigidify further possibilities of dialogue. According to par. 1, the unconstitutionality decisions have a general and binding force meaning that the provision at stake is nullified from the moment it entered into force. However, par. 3 allows the court to determine more limited effects according to reasons of legal security, fairness or a vital public interest. Traditionally, this provision was interpreted as allowing the court to issue a policy judgement suspending the unconstitutionality effects until the date the decision was delivered or published. Recently, during the austerity constitutional case law (Canotilho et al. 2015), the PCC opted to suspend the effects of its decision pro futuro, something that was fiercely criticised by some legal scholars (Roque 2012; Blanco de Morais 2013). The case concerned provisions of the Budget Law that enshrined a partial or total suspension of the payment of the holiday and Christmas allowance to public workers and pensioners. Since it was a budgetary provision (i.e. yearly valid) the suspension of the effects of the decision transformed the ruling, in practice, in a mere declaration of unconstitutionality because the provisions were applied in 2012 and the cuts were put to force. However, the PCC never made use of such power again. Considering the criticisms and the emergency context in which it was used, it is unlikely the PCC will be willingly resorting to such power again. The relationship between the PCC and the national and regional Parliaments (particularly the legislative assembly of Madeira) has not always been easy. The criticism to constitutional case law on regional autonomy by Madeira officials is well-known and has even generated constitutional revision proposals drafted by MPs aimed at the extinction of the PCC. At the national level, the PCC has also proved its counter-majoritarian role, particularly in the mid-1990s and, more recently, with the austerity period and the critical unconstitutionality rulings that caused public outrage by the Government and its supporting parties. Such outrage was followed by

250  Nuno Garoupa et al.

international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the European Commission. There had never been such an apparent clash between the PCC and other branches of power. To be sure, despite the legal and political controversies, the court’s role as the guardian of the Constitution has been strengthened and legitimised since the country’s ability to straighten its budgetary position was not endangered. In such a critical period, the PCC proved its success by striking a delicate balance between upholding the constitutional supremacy and applying flexible constitutional interpretation during a financial crisis emergency.

Empirical evidence on judicial behaviour at the Spanish and Portuguese Constitutional Courts

Empirical studies about judicial behaviour and constitutional review have a long tradition in the United States (Epstein et al. 2013; Epstein 2016). The Spanish and Portuguese Constitutional Courts have been the object of empirical analysis quite early for European standards (Garoupa 2019). More recently, legal economists and political scientists have used econometric instruments and ideal-point estimations to appraise them. Overall, studies point out that both courts have a strong left-right or progressive-­ conservative cleavage (Hanretty 2012). However, the specific patterns of ­judicial behaviour and empirical determinants vary. In Spain, a pioneering study showed how judges who sided in favour and against specific legislation regarding the two most hotly contested issues at the time (abortion and expropriation of a controversial business tycoon) formed two distinct clusters, progressive and conservative. The study suggested that, over the 1980–1985 period, judges concurred significantly more often with judges of the same cluster, than with those of the other (del Castillo Vera 1987). A later empirical study questioned the actual prevalence of party interests and offered a more nuanced empirical characterisation of judicial behaviour in the SCC (Araújo and Magalhães 2000). The study discussed the importance of unanimous decisions in the period 1980–2001 as well as the institutional constraints that individual judges faced in the SCC. More recently, Garoupa and colleagues (2013) show that political variables, including the progressive (PSOE) and conservative (Popular Party, PP) characterisation, partially (but not entirely) explain the behaviour of constitutional judges in Spain. Looking at 297 decisions (recurso de inconstitucionalidad), for the period 1980–2006, the authors find that 192 were unanimous decisions, 64 per cent of which were decisions for constitutionality whilst 36 per cent invalidated the challenged statute. The patterns do not seem to vary across time and political cycle. Whilst party alignment is, by and large, the dominant determinant of decisions, other considerations seem to matter, for example, the involvement of Catalan and Basque parties. Additional work about the SCC seems to validate the idea that party loyalty and ideology play an important role, but in no way do they fully

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  251

characterise judicial behaviour in Spanish courts (Ramos Romeu 2006; Garoupa et al. 2012; Mayoral Díaz-Asensio 2013). The issue of federalism and autonomous communities related litigation in the SCC has inevitably attracted significant attention. Given the somehow incomplete nature of the SC, and the political trend to shirk responsibility over contested policies, in particular concerning the balance between national and regional powers, the SCC has been confronted with a controversial role (Sala 2013). Consequently, the role of ideology and party loyalty is tempered by the weighting of critical federal challenges (Sala 2014). Inevitably, judicial behaviour might respond to specific institutional constraints when it comes to historical autonomous communities such as the Basque Country and ­Catalonia (Sala 2011). In fact, empirical evidence (Garoupa et al. 2013) supports the idea that constitutional judges face conflicting and diffused interests when addressing the balance between the two national parties (PSOE and PP) and strong regional parties (e.g. Basque Nationalist Party, PNV, in the Basque Country and the former Convergence and Union, CiU, in Catalonia). Other mechanisms – such as the civil law tradition and legal background – might also reinforce the observed trend to unanimous voting in earlier periods of the court. More recently, a new empirical study focused on cases addressing conflicts of power between national and regional governments for the period 1981–2014 (López-Laborda et al. 2018) shows that there is no general statistical predisposition to favour either side. In this study, 365 decisions on conflicts of competence between central and regional governments for the period 1981–2014 are considered. Whilst the 1990s seems to have low constitutional review, the 1980s and the post-2003 periods have witness strong litigation. The Basque country dominated the earlier periods (although Catalonia, Galicia and other regions also play a significant role) whilst the latter period experienced intense litigation on the matters of Catalan jurisdictional conflicts. Decisions tend to favour the central government, wholly or partially (about 77 percent overall, above 80 percent for Catalan cases and 78 percent for Basque cases). Unanimous rulings prevail (81 percent), with a lower incidence in Catalan cases (about 77 percent) and a significantly higher number for Basque cases (almost 90 percent). The authors suggest that a multifaceted arrangement of ideological, legal and strategic motivations describes judicial behavior in the SCC. In Portugal, the main message from the empirical studies is that knowing how a specific party voted in Parliament on a particular law can serve as a reasonably good, albeit imperfect, predictor of how a judge appointed by that party is likely to decide in the court, particularly in what concerns ex ante review. The first wave of studies focused on the period before the 1997 reforms and detected strong party loyalty as well as other relevant determinants such as career judiciary versus other backgrounds (Araújo 1997; Magalhães and Araújo 1998; Magalhães 2003). The second wave of studies on the PCC updated the empirical methodology and discussed later periods (Amaral-Garcia et al. 2009; Santos 2011; Hanretty 2012; Coroado et al. 2017). Broadly speaking, it confirmed previous

252  Nuno Garoupa et al.

results. Importantly, these studies find that judges appointed by left-wing parties are more likely to vote against the constitutionality of statutes and laws they scrutinise than right-wing justices, even controlling for whether those parties are part of the incumbent governmental majority (and other possible sociodemographic determinants such as background, age, gender). The original leftist ideological leaning of the PC, linked to the specific historical circumstances of its enactment, has been preserved in many respects despite several amendments. Hence, it is not surprising that empirical findings suggest that progressive judges, that is, those appointed by PS and PCP, appear more often as guardians of the constitutional conformity of legislative policy (concerning invalidating statutes). Finally, most empirical studies, after controlling for the ideological leaning of the parties that appointed them, suggest that being appointed by a party in government increases the probability of that judge voting for constitutionality. In sum, ideological considerations and adjustment to partisan priorities seem to operate simultaneously in explaining judicial behaviour within the PCC. An earlier work (Amaral-Garcia et al. 2009) studies 270 preventive abstract review cases for the period 1985–2007. Unanimous decisions are not as high as in Spain, only 84 rulings (around 31 per cent). Unanimous decisions are disproportionately higher in the period 1985–1995 (under a PSD majority in the Parliament). Looking at individual votes, the rate of invalidation of statutes seems to be about 40 per cent, a significantly high figure, both by direct comparison with Spain and by international standards. It also varies widely across ideological lines: judges appointed by PSD and CDS have a rate of 21 per cent while judges indicated by PS or PCP exhibit a percentage of 57 per cent. Austerity legislation (Canotilho et al. 2015) in the complex period of 2010–2016 does not seem to have changed patterns of judicial behaviour, particularly party loyalty, ideological considerations and some inclination to dissenting (Coroado et al. 2017).13 This later work considers 60 abstract review rulings (both preventive and successive) for the period 2002–2016. Only 14 decisions were unanimous (close to 23 per cent). The rate of invalidation of statutes (or votes against constitutionality) is again close to 40 per cent, confirming the pattern identified in previous work. It does not seem widely affected by the particular period of austerity legislation. The authors find no statistically significant difference regarding court outcomes and party alignments between the period 2002–2009 and 2010–2016 as well as for austerity and other legislation within 2010–2016.

Conclusion

The Portuguese and Spanish Constitutional Courts emerged as important institutions in a period of these countries’ history, namely in the transition from a long period of authoritarianism to a new democratic regime. Both have played a significant role in stabilising democracy and institutionally modernising the countries since the 1980s up to the 21st century. However,

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  253

there are significant differences between Iberian Constitutional Courts, if anything, they offer institutional solutions to different local traditions and political circumstances. The Spanish Constitutional Court has emerged in a political transition from the Franco dictatorship to democracy. The Portuguese Constitutional Court is the final institutional evolution stemming from a revolutionary context in which leftist parties dominated political decisions. Iberian Constitutional Courts have been veto players in many essential circumstances. Still, external institutional variations should be considered when contextualising the role of both courts as veto players. Party systems are somehow different while appointment mechanisms are significantly diverse, thus resulting in different political dynamics. Unlike Portuguese unicameral and centralised system, Spanish bicameralism and decentralisation have consequences for the balance of power (although in both countries, the legislative influence of the executive branch is preponderant). The role of the Portuguese president finds no resemblance to the Spanish monarch. Finally, access to the courts (including standing) is sufficiently different to explain varying degrees of veto playing. For example, empirical studies suggest that the Spanish Constitutional Court is more cohesive (unanimous decisions are about 65 per cent in Spain against 30 per cent or less in Portugal) and more compliant (invalidation of statutes or decisions against constitutionality seem to be about 30 per cent or less in Spain against about 40 per cent in Portugal) than the Portuguese Constitutional Court. These statistical differences have to be contextualised and have little political importance absent institutional analysis. Governments and Parliaments in Spain and Portugal, for possibly different reasons, have transferred to the court controversial and unpopular decisions. Inevitably, this has resulted in making Constitutional Courts critical political actors in some delicate matters. Not surprisingly, empirical studies show that both institutions are subject to a degree of politicisation, although it varies in time and intensity. Recent events – the Catalan process in Spain, and austerity in Portugal and Spain – have posed significant challenges to both courts. These controversial events have been shaping the court and public opinion’s perception of the court in the last couple of years. However, the exact direction of these changes (reinforcement of the court’s influence or political marginalisation) is still a matter of academic and political discussion. The ongoing changes in the party system in Spain, discussed in ­Chapters 2 and 3, will inevitably reshape both courts in years to come at two levels: composition (where old parties may lose ground to new parties) and litigation (the new parliamentary realities are likely to impact petitions for constitutional review).

Notes

254  Nuno Garoupa et al.

3 For the detailed regulation of the SCC, see Title IX of the SC and Organic Law 2/1979, of 3 October, on the Constitutional Court. 4 See the official statistics elaborated by the SCC, namely those corresponding to the period 1980–1994: www.tribunalconstitucional.es/es/memorias/Estadisticas/ ESTADISTICAS-1980-1994.pdf. 5 The term can be extended to nine months in the case of conflicts of competence in which the central government and the CCAA call upon the bilateral commission to negotiate and settle an agreement. 6 Abstract review in the form of preventive constitutional challenge provided against organic laws and Statutes of Autonomy was abolished in 1985. However, the Catalan independence crisis in 2015 highlighted the need to reintroduce the preventive constitutional challenge into the case of reform of Statutes of Autonomy to avoid an SCC judgement after the national and CCAA assemblies’ approval of the Statute, and even after a referendum. 7 These delays were partly due to the excessive workload deriving from countless individual complaints filed every year with the SCC. A reform of the Organic Law in 2007, which gave the SCC some discretion to reject individual complaints in the admissibility phase, has alleviated this situation. 8 First, during the period in which the SCC analysed the constitutionality of the Catalan Statute of Autonomy (2006–2010), which ended with a judgement declaring some parts of the Statute unconstitutional (SCC judgement 31/2010, of 28 June). As a reaction to the judgement, several demonstrations were held in Catalonia against the outcome of the judgement. Since then, particularly during the Catalan independence crisis (2012–2018), Catalan political leaders have persistently criticised the SCC’s lack of independence and legitimacy. 9 In Portugal, the Government also enjoys extensive legislative power under the Constitution. In this chapter, however, we only consider the relationship between the Portuguese Constitutional Court and the national and regional parliaments. Any references to the “legislator” should be understood in this light. 10 For the detailed regulation of the PCC, see Title VI, Part III and Title I, Part IV of the PC and Law 28/82, of 15 November (last amended by Organic Law 11/2015, of 28 August). 11 If such norm is contained in an international convention, a legislative act or a regulatory decree. 12 For a critical overview of the extensive catalogue of complementary competencies assigned to the PCC, see Amaral (2012). 13 Austerity legislation also brought challenges to judicial courts where its legality was litigated. However, there is no published empirical analysis on the matter at this point.

References

Amaral, Maria Lúcia (2012). “Competências Complementares do Tribunal Constitucional Português,” Estudos em Homenagem ao Prof. Doutor José Joaquim Gomes Canotilho, Vol. II, Coimbra: Coimbra Editora, 43–55. Amaral-Garcia, Sofia, Nuno Garoupa and Veronica Grembi (2009). “Judicial Independence and Party Politics in the Kelsenian Constitutional Courts: The Case of Portugal,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 6, 383–404. Araújo, António (1997). O Tribunal Constitucional: 1989–1996: Um Estudo de Comportamento Judicial, Coimbra: Coimbra Editora. Araújo, António and Pedro C. Magalhães (2000). “A justiça constitucional: uma instituição contra as maiorias?”, Análise Social 35, 207–246.

Constitutional Courts and national parliaments  255

Blanco de Morais, Carlos (2013). “As Mutações Constitucionais Implícitas e os seus Limites Jurídicos: Autópsia de um Acórdão Controverso,” Jurismat 3, 55–90. del Castillo Vera, Pilar (1987). “Notas para el Estudio del Comportamiento Judicial: El Caso del Tribunal Constitucional,” Revista Española de Derecho Constitucional 20, 177–194. Canotilho, Mariana, Teresa Violante and Rui Lanceiro (2015). “Austerity Measures under Judicial Scrutiny: The Portuguese Constitutional Case-Law,” European Constitutional Law Review 11, 155–183. Coroado, Susana, Nuno Garoupa and Pedro C. Magalhães (2017). “Judicial Behavior under Austerity: An Empirical Analysis of Behavioral Changes in the Portuguese Constitutional Court, 2002–2016,” Journal of Law and Courts 5, 289–311. Epstein, Lee (2016), “Some Thoughts on the Study of Judicial Behavior,” William and Mary Law Review 57, 2017–2073. Epstein, Lee, William Landes and Richard Posner (2013). The Behavior of Federal Judges: A Theoretical and Empirical Study of Rational Choice, Cambridge: ­Harvard University Press. Fernandes, Jorge M., Magalhães, Pedro C. and Santana-Pereira, José. (2018). “Portugal’s Leftist Government: From Sick Man to Poster Boy?” South European Society and Politics, 23(4): 503–524. Ferreres Comella, Victor (2013). The Constitution of Spain, Oxford and Portland: Hart Publishing. Garoupa, Nuno (2019). “Constitutional Review,” in Roger D. Congleton, Bernard Grofman and Stefan Voigt (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Public Choice, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 134–155. Garoupa, Nuno, Fernando Gómez-Pomar and Marian Gili (2012). “Political Influence and Career Judges: An Empirical Analysis of Administrative Review by the Spanish Supreme Court,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 9, 795–826. Garoupa, Nuno, Fernando Gómez-Pomar and Veronica Grembi (2013). “Judging under Political Pressure: An Empirical Analysis of Constitutional Review Voting in the Spanish Constitutional Court,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 29, 513–534. Hanretty, Chris (2012). “Dissent in Iberia: The Ideal Points of Justices on the

­Spanish and Portuguese Constitutional Court,” European Journal of Political ­Research 51, 671–692. Jiménez Asensio, Rafael (2016). Los Frenos del Poder. Separación de Poderes y Control de las Instituciones. Madrid, Barcelona, Buenos Aires, São Paulo: Marcial Pons and IVAP. López-Laborda, Julio, Fernando Rodrigo and Eduardo Sanz-Arcega (2018). “Is the Spanish Constitutional Court an Instrument of the Central Government Against the Autonomous Communities?” Constitutional Political Economy 29, 317–337. Magalhães, Pedro C. (2001), “As Armas dos Fracos: o Veto Político e a Litigância Constitucional do Presidente da República,” AA.VV. A Reforma do Estado em Portugal: Problemas e Perspetivas. Atas do I Encontro Nacional de Ciência Política, Lisboa: Editorial Bizâncio. Magalhães, Pedro C. (2003), “The Limits to Judicialization: Legislative Politics and Constitutional Review in the Iberian Democracies,” Doctoral thesis, Ohio State University.

256  Nuno Garoupa et al.

Magalhães, Pedro C. and António Araújo (1998). “A Justiça Constitucional entre o Direito e a Política: o Comportamento Judicial no Tribunal Constitucional ­Português,” Análise Social 33, 7–53. Mayoral Díaz-Asensio, Juan Antonio (2013), “La Politización de la Aplicación

­Judicial del Derecho Europeo: Un Estudio del Tribunal Supremo Español,” Revista de Estudios Políticos 161, 117–141. Ramos Romeu, Francisco (2006), “Law and Politics in the Application of EC Law: Spanish Courts and the ECJ, 1986–2000,” Common Market Law Review 43, 395–421. Roque, Miguel Prata (2012). “Juízos Precários de Constitucionalidade – O Tribunal Constitucional perante a Crise do Modelo Social Europeu e o Retrocesso dos Direitos Fundamentais,” Estudos em Homenagem ao Prof. Doutor Jorge Miranda, Vol. II, Coimbra: Coimbra Editora, 849–896. Sala, Gemma (2011). “Courts as Political Institutions with Legal Constraints:

­Evidence from Spain,” work presented at the ECPR general conference 2011. Sala, Gemma (2013). “Federalism without Adjectives in Spain,” Publius: The Journal of Federalism 44, 109–134. Sala, Gemma (2014). “Can Courts Make Federalism Work? A Game Theory

­Approach to Court-induced Compliance and Defection in Federal Systems,” Economies 2, 193–217. Santos, Ana Catarina (2011). O Tribunal Constitucional (1983–2008), Contributos para o Estudo do Tribunal Constitucional, seu Papel Político e Politização do Comportamento Judicial em Portugal, Coimbra: Almedina Editora.

Portugal and Spain kicked off the third wave of democratisation in the 1970s. In the ensuing decades, the two countries attracted extensive scholarly attention aiming to understand the causes and consequences of the transition to democracy and consolidation. At the same time, political science as a discipline witnessed exponential growth. Scholars dedicated their efforts to produce comparative and case-study research in English on parties, party systems, electoral behaviour, judicial politics, and the impact of European Union integration. Legislative studies lagged in the development of political science in Iberian legislatures. True, in both countries, there have been groundbreaking works on the Assembleia da República and las Cortes ­Generales (e.g., Leston-Bandeira 2004; Coller et al. 2018). Unlike other contexts, for example, the United Kingdom, Germany, or Italy, the development of legislative studies on the Iberian legislatures has been patchy and has not led to a consistent production of research outputs directed at international audiences. However, the past few years have witnessed a watershed in this regard. Today, in both Portugal and Spain there is an ever-growing interest in producing and disseminating knowledge on legislatures to an international audience. This volume makes a state of the art of the study of legislatures in Portugal and Spain. Our collection is inspired in works such as Esaiasson and Heidar’s Beyond Westminster and Congress (2000) where the authors examine Nordic legislatures from a topic-oriented perspective. Herein, we selected several essential organisational and behavioural topics of legislatures and challenged authors to examine Iberian legislatures in comparative perspectives. This collection aims to stand as the reference book in the English language for comparative politics and legislative scholars alike looking for information on Portuguese and Spanish parliamentary politics. Portugal and Spain share more than their condition as Iberian countries. Indeed, their political development and organisation have extensive similarities that make them ideal for conducting comparative work. As Field and Gray and Goes and Leston-Bandeira show in their contextual chapters, both countries have an electoral system that offers few incentives to cultivate a personal vote. Unlike most European democracies,

15 Conclusion

Jorge M. Fernandes

258  Jorge M. Fernandes

whose electoral systems offer citizens some mechanism to reward or punish representatives individually, the Iberian legislatures are similar in the extent they make the political party the pivotal organisational unit of representation. Indeed, both Portugal and Spain have legislatures whose internal organisation is focused on political parties, which have strong powers and control agenda-setting, financial resources, and so forth. Portugal and Spain diverge regarding party system development. As Field and Gray show, the Spanish party system is undergoing essential changes whose full-fledge consequences remain to be seen. The emergence of new parties, such as Podemos, Ciudadanos, and Vox, put an end to several decades of bipartisanship, during which PSOE and PP dominated. On the contrary, Goes and Leston-Bandeira show that, despite the deep economic crisis, the Portuguese party system remains stable, without new challengers emerging. In that regard, Portugal is one of the few European countries whose party system has not suffered any change over the past few years. On the one hand, the change (or lack thereof) suggests that existing actors are fulfilling the representation needs of the population. On the other hand, an anaemic and weak civil society does not offer fertile ground for the emergence of new challengers. Jalali and Teruel examine parliamentary party groups in Iberian legislatures. The authors show that, in both countries, there is a strong dependence of parliamentary party groups on the extra-parliamentary organisation. Such finding is in line with recent developments in European democracies, where party facets have morphed onto increasingly undistinguishable entities. In the Iberian legislatures, the structural organisational weaknesses of parties create incentives for extra-parliamentary structures to exert active control over parliamentary groups, in that the state offers vital financial and staff resources for parties. Jalali and Teruel suggest that, together with the electoral system, the internal balance of power in political parties erodes the independence of individual MPs. The authors further examine the extent to which multilevel governance influences how parliamentary party groups operate. They suggest that increases in decision-making powers at the sub-national level reduced the power of the national parliament. Parliamentary party groups adapt their strategies at the national level to focus primarily on their policy-seeking goals, whilst focusing on office-seeking roles at the sub-national level. Fernandes and Riera turn to committee systems, which, together with parliamentary party groups, make for the organisational backbone of the legislature. The most important finding of the authors’ chapter is that Iberian legislatures are now more alike to their European counterparts where committees have an essential role in the functioning of the legislature. Both countries share similar committee allocation procedures wherein political parties determine committee composition. Furthermore, the authors underline that Portugal and Spain have had a similar trajectory concerning committee openness to the media. Over the past

Conclusion  259

decade, media have had increasing access to committee work, making it less effective and turning it more into a plenary-style work. There are two differences between Portugal and Spain regarding committee organisation. Fernandes and Riera show that, despite both countries having similar minority governments experiences, in Spain, there is a low overlap between committees and governmental portfolios. Moreover, Spanish MPs have fewer incentives to specialise because there are no multiple membership restrictions. In their contribution, Freire and Coller examine the ideological congruence between parliamentary elites and the citizenry before and after the 2008 Great Recession. Overall, the authors suggest that elites are increasingly mirroring society regarding gender, age, education, and profession. Indeed, Iberian legislatures are now more reflective of societal heterogeneity than ever before. Such empirical finding has important normative implications. Unlike conventional wisdom, which sees an ever-growing gulf between elites and citizens, Freire and Coller suggest that the gap is closing. In doing that, Iberian legislatures have more capacity to voice the demands of citizens and increase their responsiveness. As for the implications of the 2008 Great Recession, the authors suggest that in Spain the fledgling changes in the party system are a by-product of economic woes. Specifically, they see high electoral volatility and the entrance of two medium-size competitors as signs that citizens are open to new competitors in the electoral market. In the Portuguese case, the authors remark that the most critical effect of the crisis has been the changes in the coalescing patterns between the Socialists and the extreme-left parties. Freire and Coller’s contribution points out to the high uncertainty of such changes. Indeed, the authors say that upcoming elections will offer more evidence on the consolidation or erosion of representation changes. Espírito-Santo, Verge, and Morales make an innovative analysis of descriptive representation by examining the Iberian legislatures’ descriptive representation beyond gender. To be sure, over the past decade, research on gender in Portugal and Spain has benefited from several seminal contributions. In their contribution, Espírito-Santo and colleagues incorporate overlooked dimensions, such as age, ethnicity, sexuality, and ableness. Regarding female representation, Spain fares well in comparative terms (5th in Europe) whilst Portugal ranks worst (12th). In terms of other representation dimensions, the authors find that Portugal fares better than Spain in the inclusion of ethnic minorities. On the contrary, Spain outperforms Portugal in representing LGBT and disabled MPs. In line with most existing research, the authors find that minority representation in the Iberian legislatures is behind societal heterogeneity. Formal and informal barriers to representation subsist in both Portugal and Spain. In examining the role of interest groups in the Iberian legislatures, Lisi and Muñoz offer several insights well worth noting. Similar to other European countries, committees are the privileged arena for interest groups to exert

260  Jorge M. Fernandes

their influence. The fact that committees have significant decision-making powers, and conglomerate representatives with an above-average interest in the topic, makes them the most obvious channel of influence. However, the authors also underline the importance of informal contacts as a mechanism of influence. Lisi and Muñoz draw attention to differences between the Iberian legislatures. In Spanish pluralist model, NGOs play a more significant role in parliamentary hearings. On the contrary, Portugal has a more conservative, corporative, model wherein institutionalised groups have more opportunities to influence policy-making. The authors point out to ­differences in state centralisation and party system as the most critical determinants of cross-national differences between Portugal and Spain. Santana-Pereira and Martín examine political trust and support for parliaments in the Iberian legislatures. Such a topic is of particular relevance in an era of populism and citizen disaffection. Using survey data, the authors show that there is diffuse support for legislatures, which suggests that citizens see them as pivotal bodies for representation and decision-making in democratic polities. That is, citizens understand in abstract terms the importance of the legislative branch. However, the authors also find that citizens tend to have negative attitudes towards parliament in both countries, exhibiting high levels of distrust. By and large, perceptions of corruption and of lack of political responsiveness are the most important determinants for specific disaffection with parliament. Furthermore, Santana-Pereira and Martín use micro-level data to explore citizens’ opinions on parliamentary styles of representation. Their findings suggest that voters see MPs as being out of touch with ordinary citizens. Also, that MPs do not reflect the median opinion of voters. Such findings are puzzling insofar as they offer contradictory evidence to Freire and Coller’s chapter where the authors suggested an increased congruence between elites and voters. In their chapter, Ribeiro, Araújo and Rodrigues deal with the legislative process. The authors point out the pivotal role of legislatures in law-­making in both Portugal and Spain due to the prevalence of minority governments. Indeed, the existence of minority governments puts the legislative arena at the heart of political bargaining. However, Ribeiro and colleagues point out to problems in the quality of laws insofar as the need to accommodate differing positions results in legislative patchwork. There is an essential difference between Portugal and Spain that impacts the balance of power in executive-legislative relations: in Spain, the executive holds significant powers in legislative agenda-setting. Furthermore, the executive has extensive powers to veto parliamentary bills. On the contrary, in Portugal, executive-­ legislative relationships are tilted towards the legislative branch. Indeed, the Assembleia da República has the power to call back government’s ­decrees-law, change them and even suspend their enforcement. Sánchez de Dios analyses the accountability function of the Iberian legislatures. Overall, the author finds that both countries have a similar accountability structure. Legislative actors make extensive use of parliamentary written questions, oral questions, indirizzo, and committees. The chapter

Conclusion  261

provides rich empirical data on the use of accountability tools. Sánchez de Dios reminds us that the Spanish committee system has more powers in terms of its accountability function. Furthermore, in Spain, the Senate plays a vital role in monitoring the executive. The existence of a popularly elected president does not change accountability patterns in Portugal. Indeed, similar to Spain, the Portuguese government is solely accountable to the legislature. Aranda and Sande turn to how Iberian legislatures operate in the multilevel governance context of the European Union. In the early 2000s, ­Iberian legislatures were classified as slow adaptation parliaments due to their lack of involvement in European Union affairs. Today much has changed. Both parliaments have developed internal structures to deal with the increasing workload at the supranational level. However, there are differences between the two countries. In Spain, EU-related matters are concentrated in the ­European Affairs Committee. On the contrary, in Portugal, there is a horizontal distribution of labour in that workload is distributed depending on the committee’s focus, regardless of the national or supranational source. Furthermore, the Spanish Parliament has been slower than the Portuguese in taking up opportunities to have representatives in supranational cooperating bodies. Despite Spain’s decentralisation, Aranda and Sande suggest that regional parliaments do not use institutional channels to have a say in EU affairs. Oñate and Belchior turn to the relationship established between national and subnational legislatures in Iberia. The authors underline the role of political parties as cooperation and preference alignment mechanisms in vertical integration. That is, parties exert a strong centripetal influence curbing dissent and potential agency loss. Overall, the authors show that political ambition is a driving force, particularly in the Spanish case. Because MPs want to rise in the party-ranks and rise from regional to national politics, there are incentives to cultivate a party-centred approach to career vis-à-vis a regional-focus perspective. Finally, Garoupa, Solanes Mullor and Violante turn to the relationship between legislatures and constitutional courts in Iberia. In their contribution, the authors suggest that constitutional courts have been essential mechanisms for the consolidation of democracy. Recently, they have played an essential role as referees of critical political issues—specifically, the Catalan question in Spain and austerity politics in Portugal. Such interventions have increased the importance of constitutional courts in the eyes of the citizens as a potential veto player. Overall, Garoupa and colleagues suggest that there is a ­politicisation of these courts. The consequences of the 2008 Great Recession, particularly the changes in the Spanish party system, remain patent in the courts for years to come.

Future research

Legislative studies on the Iberian legislatures remain in their infancy. We hope this volume, first, contributes to disseminating existing work to a wider audience, and, second, establishes a roadmap of research for the years

262  Jorge M. Fernandes

to come. The increasing easiness in data access will facilitate research on topics that have been explored extensively in more mature democracies— for example, candidate selection, the impact of party discipline, committee assignments, the intervention of interest groups in decision-making. The study of the Iberian legislatures is a burgeoning academic field. We hope this volume paves the way for more contributions in the future.

References

Coller, X., Jaime-Castillo, A. and Mota, F. (2018) Political Power in Spain. The Multiple Divides between MPs and Citizens, London: Palgrave – Macmillan. Esaiasson, P. and Heidar, K. (2000) Beyond Westminster and Congress, Columbus: Ohio State University Press. Leston-Bandeira, C. (2004) From Legislation to Legitimation: The Role of the Portuguese Parliament, London: Routledge.

Index

Note: Bold page numbers refer to tables; italic page numbers refer to figures and page numbers followed by “n” denote endnotes.

Alianza Popular (AP) 43, 57 “ambiguous constitutional compromise” 40 Amsterdam Treaty 207 Aragonese Courts 216 Arce Janáriz, A. 77 Asamblea Nacional Consultiva 26 Assembleia da República (AR) 7, 74, 85, 100, 152, 153, 167, 189, 257, 260; development of institution 18–20; early warning methodology at 217–18; Europeanisation of Portugal 10–12; and government 220–1; historical context 7–10; politics and economics 10–12; and regional parliaments 219–20; role of parliament in Portugal’s political system 12–17; see also Portuguese parliament Assembly of Extremadura 216–17 austerity legislation 252, 254n13 Autonomous Communities 40, 42, 132, 142, 167, 205, 213–14, 242 autonomy 233; functional 231; individual 51; MPs’ 52; of the parliamentary groups of PCP and BE 59; political-administrative 224; political and administrative 170; regional 35, 40–1, 234, 248–9 Aznar, José María 36, 38, 39

Barroso, Durão 212 “Barroso initiative” 208, 217 Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) 32–6, 39, 51, 57, 184, 251 Basque Parliament 216–17 Better Regulation policy programme 175 bicameralism 50, 187, 200

bicameral legislature 1, 26 Bloco de Esquerda (BE) 12, 14, 16, 58, 64, 143, 169, 230, 233, 246 Bonafont, Chaqués 140 British House of Commons 114 Burke, Edmund 150 business organisations 138

caciquismo 8, 14 Caetano, Marcello 50 Calvo-Sotelo, Leopoldo 37, 39 Canal Parlamento 84 candidate selection and gender quotas 158–9 Carnations’ Revolution 7, 9 Catalan Convergence and Union (CiU) 32–9, 43, 51–2, 57, 106–7, 184, 251 Catalan European Democratic Party (PDeCat) 37, 43 Catalan independence movement 42 Catalan Parliament 42, 143 Catholicism 8 CCAA 242–3, 245, 254n5, 254n6 CCS see Comparative Candidates Survey Centro Democrático Social-Partido Popular (CDS-PP) 59 channels of interaction between interest groups and parliament 136 citizens: ideological congruence between MPs and 91–107; social distance between MPs and 91–107 “Citizens and parliamentarians in times of crisis and democratic renewal: the comparative case of Spain in the South of Europe” 107n1

264  Index

Citizens/Ciudadanos (Cs) 36, 37, 39, 43, 53, 107n1, 115 Ciudadanos 37, 43, 53, 17 civic organisations see interest groups civil society associations 134 Civil War 50 closed-list electoral system 49, 59, 72 Coelho, Passos 142 Comisión de Investigación see investigation committees Comisiones Permanentes Legislativas 137 Comissão Constitucional (Constitutional Commission) 245 committee assignments 71, 74, 81–3 Committee on International Development Cooperation 80 committee openness 74, 258–9 committee systems in Iberian legislatures: committee powers 85; committee procedures 81–4; committee structure 77–80; in 21st century 77–84 committee systems in legislatures 72–5; committee powers 75; committee procedures 73–5; committee structure 72–3 committee systems in Portugal 71–86; committee systems in historical perspective 75–7; committee systems in Iberian legislatures 77–84; committee systems in legislatures 72–5 committee systems in Spain 71–86; committee systems in historical perspective 75–7; committee systems in Iberian legislatures 77–84; committee systems in legislatures 72–5 Comparative Candidates Survey (CCS) 96 Conference of Leaders 18, 68n1 Conference of Parliamentary Committees for Union Affairs of Parliaments of EU 207 ‘confluential dynamic representation’ 94, 104, 106 Congreso de los Diputados (CdlD) 80, 85, 100, 168, 226–7, 235 Congress of Deputies, Spain 25–42, 98, 152, 156, 182–3, 213; election results (1977–2016) 33–4 Consejo de Política Fiscal y Financiera (CPFF) 41 Conselho da Revolução (Council of Revolution) 245 consociationism 93

Constitutional Court and Parliament in Portugal 245–50; appointment mechanisms 245–7; background 245– 7; constitutional litigation 247–50; from interaction to conflict 245–50 Constitutional Court and Parliament in Spain: appointment mechanism 241– 3; background 241–3; constitutional litigation 243–5; ways of interaction and current problems 241–5 constitutional litigation 243–5 Constitutional Treaty 208 Constitution of 1933 8 contextual background, interest groups in Iberian parliaments 131–5 corporatism, with Catholicism 8 Cortes Generales 25, 185, 194 COSAC (Conférence des Organes Spécialisés dans les Affaires Communautaires) 207, 211–12, 217 Costa, António 16 Council of State 9; regional representation in 228–9 Council of the Revolution 9, 21n4 Court of Accounts, Portugal 229 Courts of Castile and León 217

Danish Parliament 220 ‘dark lobbying’ 142 decentralisation: in Spain 40–2; Spanish parliament 40–2 decree-laws vs. laws 174–6 Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) 35, 58–9, 62–6, 81, 103 Democratic Convergence of Catalonia (CDC) 37 Democratic Social Centre/Centro Democrático Social (CDS-PP) 14–15, 59, 101, 103–4, 115 Democratic Union of Catalonia 37 de Rivera, Miguel Primo 26 descriptive representation 91–4, 111; advanced 31; defined 91, 111; through an intersectional perspective 111–24; women’s 43, 112–14 de Velasco, José Antonio Girón 27 D’Hondt method, to rank parties 81 Digital Parliament Group’s initiatives 20 Digital Parliament Working Group 180–1 disabled MP 115, 116, 117, 121, 123, 128, 129 ‘disconnecting dynamic representation’ 94, 104

Index  265

dispersion of policy-making authority 40–2 diversity gap: in parliaments 111, 117; in Portuguese parliaments 111–24; in Spanish parliaments 111–24 diversity representation outcomes: in Portuguese parliaments 116–22; in Spanish parliaments 116–22

Eanes, Ramalho 9 early warning methodology at AR 217–18 “Early Warning Procedure” (EWP) 217 early warning process and political dialogue 218–19 Economic and Social Council (CES) 133 economics: crisis 101, 104; Portugal 10–12 Effective Number of Parliamentary Parties (ENPP) index 15 electoral system: candidate selection and 158–60; closed-list 49; for Congress of Deputies 30; Iberian citizen 159–60; Portugal’s constitutional design 13–14 Entidade de Transparência dos Titulares de Cargos Políticos e Altos Cargos Públicos 143 E-participation in law-making process 180–1 Equality Law 31 Estado Novo (New State) 8, 50 ETA (Basque Homeland and Liberty) 32 European Affairs Committee (EAC) in Portugal 209, 261 European Central Bank 11 European Commission 11, 29, 250 European Council 205, 209, 210, 212 European Economic Community (EEC) 10, 27, 167, 209 Europeanisation: and economic transformation 27–9; of Portugal 10–12; Spanish parliament 27–9 European legislation scrutiny 220 European Monetary Union (EMU) 10–12 European Parliament (EP) 71, 205 European Union (EU) 1, 25, 79, 153, 205, 261; affairs specialized committees, role of 208–9; Conference of Parliamentary Committees for Union Affairs of Parliaments of 207; consideration of EU legislative proposals by Portuguese parliament

217–21; consideration of EU legislative proposals by Spanish Parliament 213–17; “democratic deficit” of 205; Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) 11, 44n5; Joint Committee for 208–9, 211, 215; NPs’ European Affairs Committees 207; parliaments’ participation in inter-parliamentary cooperation 211–13; participation of Portuguese parliament in activity of 205–21; participation of Spanish parliament in activity of 205–21; Portugal joining 206; role of other parliamentary committees 211; role of parliamentary committees and the plenary in the scrutiny of EU affairs 208–11; role of plenary 210–11; role of Spanish and Portuguese parliaments in 206–8; Spain joining 206; Spanish Joint Committee for 210; trust in national parliament in 153 European Union (EU) legislative proposals: AR and government 220–1; AR and regional parliaments 219–20; consideration by Portuguese parliament 217–21; consideration by Spanish Parliament 213–17; early warning methodology at AR 217–18; early warning process and political dialogue 218–19; evaluation of process of considering EU legislation 215; on the intervention of government in issuance of reports 215–16; intervention of national and regional parliaments 214–15; on position of autonomous communities in issuance of opinions 216–17 Eurozone 11, 12, 27 EU Treaty 208 executives: monitoring of 188; and PPGs 65–7; reputation of 8; tools to enforce legislative priority role 173 extra-parliamentary party organisation, and PPGs 63–5

Facebook 61, 182 Falcato, Jorge 116 Felipe VI, King of Spain 25 Fernández-Miranda, Torcuato 27 15-M (anti-austerity movement) 29 first-generation migrants 119 focus of representation 156–7 formal channels 135, 143

266  Index

Franco, Francisco 25, 26, 35 Francoist period 50

Galician Nationalist Bloc (BNG) 36 gender quotas, and candidate selection 158–9 German Bundestag 71 German Verfassungsbeschwerde 248 González, Felipe 28, 35, 38–9 Gori, Rita Bosaho 117 governance: AR and 220–1; Spanish parliament 37–40 Great Recession 3, 91, 94, 95, 101, 103–6, 141, 259; Iberian Legislatures before and after 91–107 Guterres, António 10–11, 15

historical background, interest groups in Iberian parliaments 131–5 historical context: and re-democratisation 26–7; Spanish parliament 26–7 Historical Memory Law 27

Iberian citizens: candidate selection and electoral system 158–60; candidate selection and gender quotas 158–9; diffuse support 151–5; electoral system 159–60; focus of representation 155–7; importance of parliamentary institutions 151–5; style of representation 155, 157–8; views on their parliaments 149–62 Iberian Constitutional Courts 253 Iberian democracies 151; parliamentary party groups (PPGs) in 49–68 Iberian legislatures: before and after the Great Recession 91–107; committee organisation and resources in 78; committee systems in 75–7, 77–84 Iberian parliaments: interest groups in 130–45; legislative role of 167–85; role of interest groups within 135–40 ICT 180–2, 185 ideological congruence: measuring 95; between MPs and citizens 91–107; in Portugal 101–6; in Spain 101–6 Index of Electoral Bias 94 Index of Social Disproportion (ISD) 94, 98, 100; for Portugal 99; for Spain 99 informal channels 135, 136, 141 Instagram 182

institutional framework: for legislative process in Portugal 167–72; for legislative process in Spain 167–72 institutional status of PPGs in parliaments 50–6 interest groups 130–45; channels of interaction between parliament and 136; formal channels 135; historical and contextual background 131–5; informal channels 135; role within Iberian parliaments 135–40; transparency and regulation of interest groups interaction with parliament 141–3 International Monetary Fund (IMF) 11, 15, 21n5, 250 INTUNE project 96 investigation committees 137 IPEX 212, 218–19 ISDS 100, 106

Joint Committee for the European Union 211, 215 Juan Carlos I, King of Spain 8, 25 jurisdictional arrangements 73, 79

Law for Political Reform 27 laws vs. decree-laws 174–6 Left Block/Bloco de Esquerda (BE) 12, 14, 16, 58, 64, 115, 143, 169, 230, 233, 246 ‘Legislate Better’ (Government resolution nº63/2006) program 141 legislative performance 172–3 legislative production: in Portugal’s first 20 years of democracy 174; in Portugal’s last 20 years of democracy 175; in Spain’s first 20 years of democracy 176; in Spain’s last 19 years of democracy 177 legislative role of Iberian parliaments 167–85; controversies and problems for parliaments and legislative activity 183–4; institutional framework for legislative process in Portugal 167–72; institutional framework for legislative process in Spain 167–72; legislative performance in both parliaments 172– 80; transparency, citizens’ accessibility and ICT enhancing it 180–2 legislatures, bicameral 1, 26; committee systems in 72–5; European 21; functioning of 1; in Portugal 2, 67, 81, 85, 86, 100, 182, 220–1, 257; PPGs

Index  267

in 49, 53; in Spain 1, 2, 82, 85, 167, 210, 257 LGBT community 113, 259 LGBT MPs 113, 121 liberal democracies 187 Lisbon Treaty 27, 205, 208–9, 212, 217 Llorente, Rubio 77, 85 Lomba, Pedro 142

Maastricht Treaty 207 Mancha, Antonio Hernández 57 members of parliament (MPs) 149; by age cohort and gender, numbers and percentage 118; average age of MPs by political party 119; “descriptive representation” 91–4; disabled 128, 129; female, by political party, number and percentage 118; focus of representation 156–7; frequency of regional MPs’ conversations 236; identifiable by citizens as minorities 128, 129; ideological congruence between citizens and 91–107; with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by gender, number and percentage 120; with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by political party, number and percentage 122; internal functioning of PPGs and relation with individual 56–9; of migrant background 129; multi-level previous political experience of national and regional 234; openly gay/lesbian 128, 129; political representation 91; and population socio-demographic profiles 97; representing 156; social distance between citizens and 91–107; style of representation 157–8; substantive representation 91–4, 101–6; usefulness of interaction between regionalnational 237; who identify themselves as minorities 128; who publicly identify themselves with ethnic/ national identity group 129 Monti II 219 Movement of the Armed Forces (MFA) 9 Müller, W. C. 72 multiple membership restrictions 73, 259

National Assembly of France 189 national parliaments (NPs) 208; institutional linkage-mechanisms for

coordination and cooperation between regional and 225–30; in Portugal 223–39; in Spain 223–39; trust in Portugal, Spain and the EU 153 NGOs 130, 137–8, 144, 260 “non-institutional federalism” 40

Official Gazette of the Spanish State (BOE) 184, 243 Opello Jr., W. C. 76 openly gay/lesbian MPs 128, 129 opposition strategies: of Portuguese parties 192–4; of Spanish parties 197–9 Organic Law of the Assembly of the Republic (Law 32/77) 61

PAOD (Periodo Antes da Ordem do Dia) debates 191 Parity Law 114 parliamentary accountability 187–9; in Portugal 189–94, 190; in Spain 194–9, 195 parliamentary appreciations: of Government’ laws in Portugal 177–80; in Portugal (1997–2017) 181 parliamentary committees 49, 56, 65, 77; role in Portugal 132, 211; role in the scrutiny of EU affairs 208–11; size in Spain 80; types of 79 parliamentary democracies 72, 74 parliamentary hearings per committee: Portugal 138; Spain 139 parliamentary institutions: importance of 151–5; interest in, and knowledge of, parliament 152; satisfaction with the way parliaments work and other attitudes 154–5; trust in parliament 152–4 parliamentary party complex model 51, 230, 232 parliamentary party groups (PPGs) 49–68; institutional status in parliaments 50–6; internal functioning of 56–9; relations between executive and 65–7; relations established with extra-parliamentary party organisation 63–5; relation with individual MPs 56–9; resources provided to 60–3 Parliamentary Working Group to Consolidate Legislation (Portuguese Parliament) 182 parliamentary written questions 189, 194

268  Index

Parliament of Young People programme 20 parliaments: channels of interaction between interest groups and 136; controversies and problems for 183–4; Iberian citizens’ views on their 149–62; institutional status of PPGs in 50–6; interest in, and knowledge of 152; participation in inter-parliamentary cooperation 211–13; Portugal’s political system, role of 12–17; proposals initiated and proposals passed in 176–7; regulation of interest groups interaction with 141–3; in Spain’s political system 29–32; and their legislative activity 183–4; transparency of interest groups interaction with 141–3; trust in 152–4 Partido Popular (PP) 28, 115, 143, 230 Partido Social Demócrata (PSD) 59, 115 Partido Socialista (PS) 59, 115 Partido Socialista Obrero Español (PSOE) 28, 115, 230 party system, Spain: evolution of 32–7; multiparty system and new party challengers (2015–present) 36–7; parliament in 29–32; predominant party system (1982–1993) 35; transitional multiparty party system (1977–1982) 32–5; two-party dominant system (1993–2015) 36 PCP-Greens 12, 14, 16 People, Animals and Nature Party/ Pessoas Animais e Natureza (PAN) 115 People’s Party/Partido Popular (PP) 28, 115, 143, 230 Pereira, Júlia Mendes 117 Petitions (consultas) 140 Petitions Committee (Comisión de Peticiones) 140 Pinheiro, Dias 213 Podemos 37, 43, 53, 68n2, 107 ‘polarized pluralism’ 15 policy-making authority 25; dispersion of 40–2 political representation 91 political system (Portugal) 10–12; core political institutions 12–14; development of the party system 14–16; opposition strategies of parties 192–4; relationship between parliament and government 16–17; role of parliament in 12–17 political trust 150, 152, 153, 260

Popular Alliance/Alianza Popular (AP) 43, 57 Popular Party/Partido Popular (PP) 80, 115, 233 Popular Socialist Party (PSP) 32 Portugal: accession to EU 10; average age of MPs by political party 119; British ultimatum of 1890 8; Chamber of Deputies 8; channels of interaction between interest groups and parliament 136; committee systems in 71–86; Constitutional Courts and national Parliaments in 241–54; Constitutional Monarchy, collapse of 8; constitutional monarchy of 1822–1910 8, 50; core political institutions 12–14; democracy 9–10, 13; development of the party system 14–16; disabled MP 128; economy 8; European Affairs Committee (EAC) in 209; Europeanisation of 10–12; female MPs by political party, number and percentage 118; first MPs from each of underrepresented social groups 116; First Republic 50; ideological congruence between voters and MPs in 102–3; ideological congruence in 101–6; Index of Social Disproportion (ISD) for 99; institutional framework for the legislative process in 167–72; joining European Union 206; ‘Legislate Better’ (Government resolution nº63/2006) program 141; legislative production in Portugal’s first 20 years of democracy 174; legislative production in Portugal’s last 20 years of democracy 175; MPs and population socio-demographic profiles 97; MPs by age cohort and gender, numbers and percentage 118; MPs identifiable by citizens as minorities 128; MPs who identify themselves as minorities 128; MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by gender, number and percentage 120; MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by political party, number and percentage 122; national parliaments in 223–39; New State 8–9; number of accountability procedures held per session (1985– 2015) 192; number of bills presented

Index  269

and approved in the 12th legislature 172; number of staff per PPG in 63; openly gay/lesbian MPs 128; opposition strategies of Portuguese parties 192–4; Parity Law 114; parliamentary accountability in 189– 94, 190; parliamentary appreciation of Government’ laws in 177–80; parliamentary appreciations in (19972017) 181; parliamentary hearings per committee 138; parliamentary party groups in Portuguese chamber 54–5; party-voters Congruence before and after 2008 economic crisis 101; politics and economics 10–12; regional parliaments in 223–39; relationship between parliament and government 16–17; relationship between regional and national parliaments in 223–39; role of parliament in political system of 12–17; as semi-presidential democracy 1; social disproportion in 96–101; Synthetic Index of Social Disproportion in 101; trust in the national parliament in 153 Portuguese Communist Party/Partido Comunista Português (PCP) 9, 53, 115, 143 Portuguese Constitution 13, 53, 168, 245; amendments to 170–1; expanding parliament’s role 170–1; major bills on which parliaments have a key role 171–2 Portuguese Constitutional Courts: empirical evidence on judicial behaviour at 250–2 Portuguese Election Study of 2002 160 Portuguese Parliament 98, 137, 167; AR and the government 220–1; AR and the regional parliaments 219–20; average time to approve laws in 180; consideration of EU legislative proposals by 217–21; Digital Parliament Working Group 180–1; diversity gap in 111–24; diversity representation outcomes in 116–22; early warning methodology at AR 217–18; early warning process and political dialogue 218–19; European Union (EU) 206–8; legislative performance in 172–80; major bills on which parliaments have a key role 171–2; Parliamentary Working Group to Consolidate Legislation 182;

participation in activity of EU 205– 21; proposals initiated and passed in (1976–2017) 178; see also Assembleia da República (AR) Portuguese Science Foundation (FCT) 107n1 Portuguese Socialist Party/Partido Socialista (PS) 59, 115 positive discrimination 93 Primo de Rivera, Miguel 26 pro-European Socialist Party (PS) 9

Rajoy, Mariano 36, 37, 58, 64 regional initiative of national bills and referenda 229 regional parliaments: AR and 219–20; cooperation agreements between regions 226; institutional linkagemechanisms for coordination and cooperation between national and 225–30; introduction of bills in the national parliament by 226; in Portugal 223–39; proposals of Constitutional Court judges 226–7; revisions of the regional statutes or constitutions 227; senators appointed by 225–6; in Spain 223–39 regional representation in Council of State 228–9 regulation of interest groups interaction with parliament 141–3 representative democracy 10, 93, 149, 150, 185, 208 Republic: accountability of the regional assemblies and representatives of Republic towards President of 229; appointment of a representative of 228; relationship of autonomous regions with judiciary branch of 229–30 Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC) 36 resources, to PPGs 60–3 revisions of the regional statutes 227, 230 Rodrigues, Maria J. 212

Salazar, António de Oliveira 7–8, 21n3 Sampaio, Jorge 13, 15 Sánchez, Pedro 39–40, 57, 64 senators appointed by regional parliaments 225–6 Silva, Cavaco 13, 17 Simplex + programme 175 single-party minority and majority cabinets 37–40

270  Index

slow adaptation parliaments 205, 220 Social Democratic Party/Partido Social Demócrata (PSD) 9, 115, 233, 246 Social Democrats 194 social disproportion in Portugal and Spain 96–101 social distance: measuring 94–5; between MPs and citizens 91–107 Socialist Catalan party 51 Socialist Party (PS) 10, 200, 233 Socialist Party of Andalusia (PSA) 32 social media 133, 185 social unrest 8 Southern European democracies 91, 154 Spain: average age of MPs by political party 119; channels of interaction between interest groups and parliament 136; committee systems in 71–86; Congress of Deputies 25–42, 33–4, 98, 152, 156, 182–3, 213; congruence of ideological position in each party according to voters in 17 regions 232; Constitutional Courts and national Parliaments in 241–54; decentralisation in 40–2; disabled MP 129; dispersion of policy-making authority 40–2; evolution of the party system(s) in 32–7; female MPs by political party, number and percentage 118; first MPs from each of the underrepresented social groups 116; global financial crisis and 29; governance in 37–40; governments and government status 38; ideological congruence between voters and MPs in 105; ideological congruence in 101–6; Index of Social Disproportion (ISD) for 99; institutional framework for the legislative process in 167–72; joining European Union 206; legislative production in Spain’s first 20 years of democracy 176; legislative production in Spain’s last 19 years of democracy 177; MPs and population socio-demographic profiles 97; MPs by age cohort and gender, numbers and percentage 118; MPs identifiable by citizens as minorities 129; MPs of migrant background 129; MPs who publicly identify themselves with an ethnic/ national identity group 129; MPs with an immigrant background and from ethnic minorities by gender, number

and percentage 120; multiparty system and new party challengers (2015– present) 36–7; national parliaments in 223–39; “nuclear option” 42; number of accountability procedures held per session (1982–2015) 192, 198; openly gay/lesbian MPs 129; opposition strategies of Spanish parties 197–9; parliamentary accountability (2011–2015) 195; parliamentary accountability in 194–9; parliamentary hearings per committee 139; parliamentary party groups in the Spanish lower chamber 52; parliament in political system of 29–32; party finance from national PPGs (both chambers) in 60; partyvoters congruence (many-to-many) before and after 2008 economic crisis 104; predominant party system (1982–1993) 35; as pure parliamentary system 1; regional parliaments in 223–39; relationship between regional and national parliaments in 223–39; single-party minority and majority cabinets in 37–40; social disproportion in 96–101; Synthetic Index of Social Disproportion in 101; transitional multiparty party system (1977–1982) 32–5; trust in the national parliament in 153; two-party dominant system (1993–2015) 36 Spanish bicameralism 168, 253 Spanish Communist Party 30; see also United Left Spanish Congreso de los Diputados 76, 85 Spanish Constitution 170; Barracks Confinement Central Board 183; Constituent Legislative Term with Royal Decree 1/1979 183; Decree-Law 1/2006 183 Spanish Constitutional Court (SCC) 241–2; empirical evidence on judicial behaviour at 250–2 Spanish Joint Committee for the EU 210 Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness 107n1 Spanish Ombudsman 79 Spanish parliament 25, 261; consideration of EU legislative proposals by 213–17; decentralisation 40–2; dispersion of policy-making authority 40–2; diversity gap in 111–24; diversity representation

Index  271

outcomes in 116–22; Europeanisation and economic transformation 27–9; European Union (EU) 206–8; evaluation of the process of considering EU legislation 215; evolution of the party system(s) 32–7; governance 37–40; historical context and re-democratisation 26–7; on intervention of government in issuance of reports 215–16; intervention of national and regional parliaments 214–15; legislative performance in 172–80; major bills on which parliaments have a key role 171–2; parliament in Spain’s political system 29–32; participation in activity of EU 205–21; on position of autonomous communities in issuance of opinions 216–17; Processing Reports 215; proposals initiated and passed in(1978–2017) 179; single-party minority and majority cabinets 37–40 Spanish recurso de amparo 248 Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party/Partido Socialista Obrero Español (PSOE) 28, 115, 230 style of representation 155, 157–8 Suárez, Adolfo 25, 29, 39 substantive representation 91–4, 101–6; ideological congruence in Portugal and Spain 101–6 Synthetic Index of Social Disproportion (SISD) 94–5; in Portugal 101; in Spain 101

‘top-down/from above representation’ 104, 106 transparency: citizens’ accessibility and ICT enhancing it 180–2; of interest

groups interaction with parliament 141–3 Treaty of the EU (TEU) 205 trust: in the national parliament in EU 153; in the national parliament in Portugal 153; in the national parliament in Spain 153; in parliament 152–4 25 April Revolution 134 Twitter 61, 182

UK House of Commons 17 (ultra)-integrated-parliamentary party complexes 224, 230 União Nacional (National Union, Popular National Action) 50 Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD) 27, 53 United Left (IU) 30, 35; see also Spanish Communist Party United Left/Izquierda Unida (IU) 115 ‘usual suspects’ 130

vertical integration: at the MP level 234– 7; national and regional parliaments’ linkage through political parties 230–4

We Can/Podemos (Ps) 115 Wert, José Ignacio 41 “Wert Law” 41 Western Europe 1, 8, 21n5, 65; democracy 8 Wheeler, D. 8 Working Group for Scrutiny of European initiatives 218

YouTube 182, 196

Zapatero, José Luis Rodríguez 27, 36, 38–9, 140

REQUEST A FREE TRIAL support@taylorfrancis.com

Taylor & Francis eBooks

www.taylorfrancis.com

A single destination for eBooks from Taylor & Francis with increased functionality and an improved user experience to meet the needs of our customers.

90,000+ eBooks of award-winning academic content in Humanities, Social Science, Science, Technology, Engineering, and Medical written by a global network of editors and authors.

TAYLOR & FRANCIS EBOOKS OFFERS:

A streamlined experience for our library customers

A single point of discovery for all of our eBook content

Improved search and discovery of content at both book and chapter level

View publication stats