Representation

Journal of Representative Democracy

ISSN: 0034-4893 (Print) 1749-4001 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rrep20

Making Sense of Citizens’ Sense of Being Represented. A Novel Conceptualisation and Measure of Feeling Represented

August De Mulder

To cite this article: August De Mulder (2023) Making Sense of Citizens’ Sense of Being Represented. A Novel Conceptualisation and Measure of Feeling Represented, Representation, 59:4, 633-657, DOI: 10.1080/00344893.2022.2095662

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00344893.2022.2095662

Published online: 08 Jul 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1030

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 11 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rrep20

Making Sense of Citizens’ Sense of Being Represented. A Novel Conceptualisation and Measure of Feeling Represented

August De Mulder

Department of political science, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium

ABSTRACT Although many studies point to the decaying relationship between citizens and their representatives, a proper conceptualisation and empirical measure of citizens’ feeling of being represented is still missing from the literature. This study, ﬁrst, oﬀers a multidimensional conceptualisation of feeling represented, focused on feelings of being substantively represented. Speciﬁcally, a distinction is made between the representative behaviour that people might perceive (whether representatives listen, know, act or succeed) and between the representative actors performing this behaviour or not (some or most representatives). Second, a measure that takes into account these diﬀerent aspects of feeling represented is developed and tested on two samples of Belgian citizens. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis and correlations with citizens’ vote intention and other indicators of political discontent demonstrate the validity of the novel measure. Also, the results point to the added value of the measure: not only may the diﬀerent aspects of feeling represented be measured independently, they also lead to more nuanced insights into the current ‘crisis of representation’ than the currently available measures do.

KEYWORDS Feeling represented; subjective representation; crisis of representation; conﬁrmatory factor analysis; Belgium

Introduction

Representative democracy seems to be in distress. In many countries, electoral turnout is declining, populist parties are on the rise and popular distrust in politicians reaches alltime highs (Hosking, 2019; Kriesi & Schulte-Cloos, 2020). Although citizens generally still show quite high support for representative democracy as a form of government, they report to be a lot less satisﬁed with the performance of its representative actors (Inglehart & Norris, 2016). It seems that many people have the perception that they are not properly being represented by the politicians and parties they elect. These perceptions of being unheard and neglected by those who are supposed to be representing can form an important part and driver of more general negative attitudes towards politics and may, in the long run, erode support for democratic representation all together (Miller & Listhaug, 1990). Although the question of whether or not citizens perceive to be well-represented by their representatives is at the heart of representative democracy,

© 2022 McDougall Trust, London CONTACT August De Mulder

REPRESENTATION 2023, VOL. 59, NO. 4, 633–657 https://doi.org/10.1080/00344893.2022.2095662

and representative democracy arguably no longer is a representative democracy if many of its citizens do not feel represented (Miller & Listhaug, 1990; Thomassen & Van Ham, 2017), we know surprisingly little about such feelings. So far, feeling represented has not been properly conceptualised nor measured in a systematic and thorough way. First, little has been written on what it means to feel represented. Predominantly, representation scholars have been concerned with the meaning of political representation itself, contemplating on what political representation is (e.g., Pitkin, 1967), what possible forms it may take (e.g., Mansbridge, 2003), or how representatives should behave (e.g., as a delegate or trustee, Burke, 1854; Dovi, 2012). Although some authors have taken more subjective approaches to representation (e.g., Rehfeld, 2006; Saward, 2010; Wahlke, 1967), rarely have they deﬁned or explained what ‘feeling represented’ then entails exactly. Yet, ‘feeling represented’ can be understood in various ways depending on the notion of representation one is thinking about; is it, for example, about descriptive representation? Or instead about substantive representation? And if so, what kind of substantive representation? This article, ﬁrst, makes a conceptual contribution to the literature and oﬀers a multidimensional conceptualisation of feeling represented, focused on feelings of being substantively represented. Second – probably resulting from the absence of a proper conceptualisation – feeling represented has not been measured in a systematic and thorough fashion. Speciﬁcally, this study discerns two main problems with how feeling represented has been measured in the literature so far: (1) studies have tried to measure feeling represented with a unidimensional question, neglecting the complex and multidimensional nature of feeling represented (e.g., Blais, Singh, & Dumitrescu, 2014; Giger, Kissau, Lutz, & Rosset, 2009; Holmberg, 2020); or (2) they have measured only one or two aspects of feeling represented as part of concepts only partially and indirectly concerned with representation, such as ‘external eﬃcacy’ or ‘populist attitudes’ (e.g., Akkerman, Mudde, & Zaslove, 2014; Craig, Niemi, & Silver, 1990; Miller & Listhaug, 1990). As a consequence, the available measures fall short in explaining what exactly is perceived by (some) citizens to be the problem in today’s representational relationship. This article makes a methodological contribution to the literature by developing and testing an empirical measure that shifts focus to speciﬁcally these feelings, and thereby aids to better understand the contemporary ‘crisis of representation’. The article is build up as follows. First, building on Pitkin’s (1967) deﬁnition of substantive representation, and on Norris’ (1999) and Golder and Stramski’s (2010) diﬀerentiation between political objects, I conceptualise feeling represented as the perception of being substantively represented, varying on two dimensions: the representative behaviour and the representative actor. The ﬁrst dimension consists of the sort of substantive representation at stake: do citizens have the feeling that representatives are listening to them, know their interests, act in accordance to their interests, and succeed in translating their interests into policy? The second dimension has to do with who is perceived as enacting (or not enacting) this behaviour. I propose a distinction between feeling represented by some representatives and feeling represented by most representatives. Second, I explain why existing measures are not able to capture citizens’ feeling of being represented, and develop a 16-item measure, taking into account the two theoretical dimensions. By testing this measure on two samples of Belgian citizens and doing Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and correlations with other variables, the validity

634 A. DE MULDER

of the multidimensional measure is demonstrated. Lastly, I make a recommendation of how a shorter 6-item version of the scale may be used.

Conceptualising ‘Feeling Represented’

The meaning of representation in representative democracy is contested and complex (Dovi, 2012) and consequently, so is the meaning of feeling represented. In probably the most inﬂuential contemporary text on political representation, Hanna Pitkin (1967) evaluates the various possible meanings of ‘representation’, and ultimately argues that the best way to think about representation is as a ‘substantive acting for others’, and that it is not just a matter of formal authorisation or accountability through elections, nor merely about ‘standing for’ the represented symbolically or descriptively. Representation is, above all, about ‘acting in the interests of the represented, in a matter responsive to them’ (p. 209). This way of looking at representation has inspired a large literature that has aimed to empirically assess the quality of representation – looking at whether or not people are represented – by examining whether representatives are acting in people’s interests (e.g., Minta, 2009; Vega & Firestone, 1995) or are responsive to their preferences (e.g., Peress, 2013; Stimson, MacKuen, & Erikson, 1995). Some prominent scholars have moved away from these ‘objective’ notions of representation though, shifting to a more subjective approach to evaluate (the quality of) representation. Saward (2006, 2010), for one, argues that in Pitkin’s view of representation, the represented are taken as having clear and stable interests that can be represented, which neglects the crucial process of constructing the represented and their needs. In the real world, voters’ interests are never just a given, something transparent that can be ‘read oﬀ’. Rather, political actors ‘read in’ these interest. They make claims about people – e.g. as ‘hard working’, ‘angry’, ‘worried’ – and actively and creatively construct an image of ‘the represented’ and their interests. Consequently, as there is never just one acceptable interpretation of citizens’ interests, the ultimate judge of whether representation is legitimate or not, are the citizens themselves – whether they feel represented. Similarly, Wahlke (1967) has argued that it is equally problematic to assume clear preferences to which representatives can be responsive as, a lot of the time, many citizens do not have clearly deﬁned policy wishes or demands. He therefore also concludes that a more realistic standard for evaluating the representational relationship, is to conceive of it subjectively. Further recent subjective approaches to representation can be found in the work of Rehfeld (2006), who argues that political representation depends, in essence, on whether a relevant audience accepts it as such, or Disch (2015) who calls to understand representation from ‘the citizen standpoint’. Although these authors give a prominent role to citizens’ feeling of being represented in their theory of representation, they ultimately do not deﬁne what such a feeling entails exactly. However, ‘feeling represented’ can be understood in various ways depending on the notion of representation one is thinking about. For instance, feeling represented may be understood in a purely descriptive manner. People may identify a politician as sharing their background and socio-demographic characteristics – e.g. a similar migration background – and feel represented in the sense that they recognize ‘someone like them’ as present in the political arena (Pitkin, 1967). Descriptive likeness (or the perception

REPRESENTATION 635

thereof) could also illicit more symbolic aspects of feeling represented, such as feelings of pride, inclusion or belonging (Lombardo & Meier, 2018). Such feelings of being descriptively or symbolically represented have been shown to be of particular importance for woman and other marginalised groups (Lavi et al., 2021). Alternatively, as the current article does, feeling represented may be understood in line with the notion of representation that Pitkin prioritises: as feeling substantively represented. This concerns perceptions about whether politicians and parties ‘represent’ your policy views and interests, for example, hold similar views, take stances or make decisions in line with your preferences and interests (Giger et al., 2009; Holmberg, 2020). But even then it is up for interpretation what ‘representing one’s views’ means: is it about ﬁnding out about and knowing one’s views? Or about actually acting in line with one’s views? Or even about successfully acting? Although some empirical studies have recently focused speciﬁcally on such feelings of being ‘substantively’ represented – asking people whether a party ‘represents their views’ (e.g., Blais et al., 2014; Giger et al., 2009; Holmberg, 2020) – this has so far not led to a clear conceptualisation of these feelings. A ﬁrst contribution this article makes is conceptualising feeling represented as feeling substantively represented, varying on two dimensions: the representative behaviour and the representative actor. The ﬁrst dimension refers to the kind of substantive representation that people perceive. Speciﬁcally, starting from Pitkin’s (1967) deﬁnition of substantive representation as ‘acting in the interests of the represented, in a manner responsive to them’ (p. 209), we can deduce that feeling represented essentially concerns citizens’ beliefs about whether representatives (1) take into account their preferences and interests, and (2) are acting on their behalf. As I will explain, these two aspects can be further split up, resulting in four elements: listening and knowing versus acting and succeeding. First, the most obvious way in which people can sense that their preferences and interests are taken into account is when they believe that representatives are listening. Listening to your constituents and informing yourself of constituents’ preferences is generally regarded as one of the most important aspects of a representative’s job, both by representation scholars (Esaiasson, Kölln, & Turper, 2015) and by citizens (Lapinski, Levendusky, Winneg, & Jamieson, 2016). Alternatively, however, citizens may also feel that their preferences and interests are taken into account when they believe that a representative simply knows what they want and need. As Wahlke (1967) notes, many people do not voice clear policy demands. Rather than wanting a politician to listen, they want someone who simply knows what they need, for instance, because the representative is perceived intelligent and competent, or because he or she is perceived to be like them (perceiving that a politician knows your interests because of descriptive representation). This might be a lot more relevant for citizens in general, including the less politically interested, knowledgeable and attentive. Third – besides perceiving that representatives listen or know – we can expect that citizens feel even better represented when they believe that representatives are also acting on their behalf. This concerns the belief that representatives are actually doing something to pursue what you ﬁnd important. And, even though acting for the represented – e.g. defending one’s (perceived) interests and preferences in parliament or submitting a bill to do so – does not necessarily lead to changing policy, ‘knowledge

636 A. DE MULDER

that eﬀorts have been made … , in itself, helps to reduce frustrations and discontent’ (Easton, 1965, p. 433). Nevertheless, we can expect that a politician or party who is also perceived to succeed in weighing in on the actual policy taps into even another (fourth) aspect of feeling represented: the feeling that your interests are successfully looked after. This is something which might diﬀerentiate people who support a party in government (governmental winners) from people who support a party that does not (governmental losers) (Singh, Karakoç, & Blais, 2012), the latter probably being less-satisﬁed about the extent to which ‘their’ party succeeds in weighing on policy. Notice that there is a certain hierarchy between these elements. First, one cannot act for the represented without listening to the represented or knowing what their preferences are. Similarly, one cannot succeed in translating one’s interests into policy without ﬁrst acting for them. There is no hierarchical diﬀerence between listening and knowing, though. Instead, they should be seen as alternative and distinct ways of perceiving to have a political input; listening requires an actual activity on part of both the representative and the represented, while knowing is more passive, and the one will be more relevant for some citizens (e.g., politically interested vs. uninterested) than the other. Besides distinguishing between what kind of representative behaviour is perceived by citizens, we should also take into account which representative actors are perceived as enacting (or not enacting) this behaviour. Making distinctions between the political objects at which political attitudes can be directed has long been suggested by theoretical scholars such as Almond and Verba (1963), Gamson (1968) and Easton (1965). Most notably, Easton (1965) distinguishes between three hierarchical objects of political support, namely the political community, the regime and the authorities. The reasoning behind such distinctions is that it is consistent for citizens to believe in democratic values, but at the same time to be critical of how democratic governments work in practice, or to have great trust in political institutions, but not in politicians. Norris (1999) built on the work of Easton and notes that citizens may make even further distinctions, for instance, ‘to disparage most politicians but to continue to support a particular leader’ [emphasis added] (pp. 7–8), and writes that if citizens can and do ‘distinguish between diﬀerent objects of support, our analysis needs to be aware of these distinctions’ (pp. 7–8). More recently, Golder and Stramski (2010) have made a similar point catered to political representation. Speciﬁcally, they argue that the amount of ideological congruence one ﬁnds between represented and representative depends on whether one is thinking about one or many representatives. This distinction between a dyadic (between a represented and a representative) and a more collective form of representation (between a represented and representatives as a class) is mostly blurred in both theoretical and empirical literature on feeling represented (Lavi et al., 2021). Yet, as some citizens might still feel represented by some representatives while believing that most representatives fail at their representative duties, it is – as Norris (1999) argued – important that our analysis is sensitive to this distinction. Furthermore, the normative and functional implications for representative democracy also diﬀer depending on whether or not people feel represented by respectively some or most representatives. Speciﬁcally, feeling represented by most representatives reﬂects ideas about the performance of ‘politicians’ and ‘parties’ more generally. It reveals something about how citizens judge the functionality and legitimacy of their representative democracy (Holmberg, 2020). Such feelings will probably be strongly related to (and

REPRESENTATION 637

perhaps even a driver of) other general orientations towards politics such as political trust and satisfaction with democracy, which have been shown to be of signiﬁcant importance for the working of democracy (Hooghe & Marien, 2013). It is, then, a positive when citizens perceive that most representatives look after their interests, and it could certainly be regarded as a negative when many citizens do not. However, not feeling represented by most representatives is not necessarily detrimental for representative democracy if one still feels represented by at least some of them, whom one can vote for and who might win in future elections. In contrast, if citizens do not even feel represented by some representatives, it is a much bigger problem. This can make people turn away from politics and exit political life completely (e.g., no longer vote, see Blais et al., 2014). Also, normatively, this situation is highly problematic; if many citizens in a representative democracy do not feel represented by any politicians or parties, one might argue that it is hardly still a representative democracy (Miller & Listhaug, 1990; Thomassen & Van Ham, 2017). Therefore, in order to properly understand citizens’ feeling of being represented and its implications (both normatively and functionally) for representative democracy, a conceptualisation of feeling represented requires disentangling citizens’ feeling of being represented by most from their feeling of being represented by some. Summarised, feeling represented should be conceptualised along two dimensions – the representative behaviour (listen vs. know vs. act vs. succeed) and the representative actor (some vs. most), which taken together result in eight ‘cells’ of feeling represented (see Table 1): the feeling that some representatives (1) listen, (2) know, (3) act and (4) succeed and the feeling that most representatives (5) listen, (6) know, (7) act, and (8) succeed. Combining the two dimensions (and its sub-elements) thereby leads to many diﬀerent ways in which we can think about and examine citizens’ feeling of being represented. For example, people may feel represented in the sense that some politicians are perceived to know what they want, and act for them, but at the same time feel very much unrepresented in the sense that these politicians are perceived unsuccessful in weighing on the actual policy. As said, we could expect this to be the case for so called ‘governmental-losers’ (Singh et al., 2012). Or some people might have the feeling that some politicians or parties do represent them very well, but at the same time believe that most representatives neglect their representative duties. This might be particular to perfervid partisans or some voters of populist parties. The combination of the two dimensions thereby oﬀers a tool that allows to make more sophisticated analytical theoretical distinctions in the extent to which citizens feel represented, going beyond dichotomously classifying citizens as either feeling represented or not. In what follows, I ﬁrst explain why current empirical measures do not allow to make these analytical distinctions and then oﬀer a new measuring instrument that does.

Table 1. Dimensions and cells of feeling represented.

Representative behaviour

Listen Know Act Succeed

Representative actor Some Some listen Some know Some act Some succeed Most Most listen Most know Most act Most succeed

638 A. DE MULDER

Why Current Indicators Do Not Measure ‘Feeling Represented’

How have these feelings of being substantively represented been measured so far? I discern two main problems: (1) studies have either tried to measure feeling represented with a general, unidimensional question, or (2) they have unsystematically measured only one or two aspects of feeling represented as part of broader or distinct concepts. Concerning the ﬁrst problem, there have been a handful of studies that have actually focused on measuring citizens’ feeling of being represented. From 2001 to 2011, the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) asked people whether they feel any of the parties or party leaders ‘represent their views reasonably well’. The question on the party level was also included in their latest module (2016–2021) and has been adopted by several other studies (e.g., Blais et al., 2014; Giger et al., 2009; Holmberg, 2020), including the inﬂuential American National Election Studies (ANES). The problem with these general unidimensional measures, however, is that they do not respond to the complexity and multidimensionality of the root-concept ‘representation’. Speciﬁcally, the above measures do not explicate what ‘representing’ in ‘representing your views’ refers to. For instance, some people might interpret representing one’s views as acting, or even successfully acting, in line with what one wants, while others might feel that a representative who simply holds similar opinions, too, ‘represents their views’. By leaving up for the respondent to interpret the meaning of representation, we do not know what we are measuring exactly. Also, it does not allow researchers to make very precise predictions. For example, with this question, we are unable to distinguish people who feel completely unrepresented from people who might only be dissatisﬁed about the extent to which their representatives succeed in weighing on policy. Yet, this diﬀerence can be quite consequential for people’s political behaviour. Second, there have been many studies that have used more speciﬁc survey items that tap into one aspect or another of citizens’ feeling of being represented. Yet, these items are scattered across studies and literatures, unsystematically measuring just one or two aspects of feeling represented as part of a broader or distinct concept, such as ‘external eﬃcacy’, or ‘populism attitudes’ (e.g., Akkerman et al., 2014; Craig et al., 1990; Miller & Listhaug, 1990; Schulz et al., 2018). As a result, these concepts are also only able to reveal part of the puzzle. The concept external eﬃcacy, for example, deals with an individual’s beliefs about the responsiveness of government authorities and institutions to citizen preferences (Chamberlain, 2012). Since 1988, the inﬂuential ANES have measured external eﬃcacy with the items ‘People like me don’t have any say about what the government does’ (NOSAY) and ‘I don’t think public oﬃcials care much what people like me think’ (NOCARE). Although these items deal with aspects of feeling represented – ’responsiveness’ is ﬁrmly anchored in representational theory (Eulau & Karps, 1977; Pitkin, 1967) – they deal with only a part of it. One could, for example, feel very well represented by representatives when believing that they succeed in dealing with societies most important problems, without necessarily perceiving to ‘have a say’. Also, these items are quite ambiguous about the political object they concern – whether they tap attitudes towards some speciﬁc representatives (current incumbents) or government representatives more generally (Craig et al., 1990) – and are thereby unable to distinguish between citizens’ perceptions about some and most

REPRESENTATION 639

representatives. Yet, as I argued in the previous section, this distinction is key for examining citizens’ feeling of being represented. Similarly, a new stream of literature that deals with measuring so-called populist attitudes also deals with perceptions about representation. In these studies, populism is mostly deﬁned in Mudde’s (2004) terms as a thin-centred ideology according to which society can be divided into two homogeneous and antagonistic groups: ‘the pure people’ on the one hand, ‘the corrupt elite’ on the other. Central to these attitudes is the idea that the general will of the people is the highest principle, while the elites are conceived as neglecting this will (Castanho Silva, Jungkunz, Helbling, & & Littvay, 2020). In other words, populist attitudes per deﬁnition reﬂect ideas about representation and particularly, about the separation between representatives (the elite) and the people, with the ﬁrst misrepresenting the latter. Consequently, studies on populist attitudes use statements such as ‘Elected oﬃcials talk too much and take too little action’ (Akkerman et al., 2014) or ‘MPs in Parliament very quickly lose touch with ordinary people’ (Schulz et al., 2018). These items tap into broader anti-establishment sentiment, only giving a general indication of whether one is or is not content with his or her representatives. Also, as populism conceives of the elites as a homogeneous entity, it makes sense to measure populist attitudes with items that all refer to diﬀuse political objects (e.g., ‘Elected oﬃcials’ or ‘MP’s’). Yet, we could imagine that voters who hold populist attitudes – and believe that ‘politicians’ are corrupt – might still feel very well-represented by a certain (perhaps populist) politician or party. From a representation standpoint, this is crucial to examine. So, although citizens’ feeling of being represented has been measured throughout time by one item or another, this has either been with an overly general, unidimensional question, or in fractured and unstructured form, as part of concepts only indirectly concerned with representation. These measures can only reveal so much about the extent to which citizens feel represented. In what follows, I oﬀer an instrument that takes into account the two dimensions of feeling represented and test its validity.

Methods

A Measure of Feeling Represented

To measure the extent to which citizens feel represented along the two theoretical dimensions (the representative behaviour and the representative actor), I developed 16 survey items, to be measured on a ﬁve-point Likert type scale ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. To reduce fatigue of respondents and at the same time to emphasize the distinction between the diﬀerent kinds of representative behaviour (listen vs. know vs. act vs. succeed), items were presented in four separate blocks of four items, each time concerned with one kind of representative behaviour. Per block, two items tapped into perceptions of representation by some representatives and two items concerned perceptions of representation by most representatives. The order of these items was randomised to avoid eﬀects of question order. In addition, both positively and negatively phrased items were used to avoid acquiescence bias – the tendency of survey respondents to agree with questions presented to them (Castanho Silva et al., 2020). The 16 items are presented in Table 2 (see Table A1 in Appendix 1 for original question wording in Dutch and French).

640 A. DE MULDER

All feeling represented-items refer to both politicians and parties as political objects by which one could feel represented. The reasoning behind this is that in many countries (including the case under study, Belgium) it is not the politicians that are the primary representative actors, but the political parties (Werner, 2019). Furthermore, as both acting in line with citizens’ preferences as well as acting in line with their interests are important aspects of political representation (Mansbridge, 2003; Pitkin, 1967), and we can expect that, in most cases, what citizens want will be consistent with what they perceive to be in their interests, items refer to both these aspects. Lastly, like the ANES eﬃcacy items, all 16 items use the phrasing ‘people like me’ as the subject of representation, instead of its alternative ‘me’ or ‘I’. This was done because, for some items, the alternative formulation would present the representative-represented relationship in

Table 2. Sixteen-item measure of feeling represented.

Variables Items

Listen_1 – Listen_4 Now we would like to ask you some questions about the extent to which you feel represented by politicians and political parties. First, we would like to present a number of statements about the extent to which politicians and parties listen to you. Can you indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements?

1. There is not a single politician or party who listens to people like me. 2. There are politicians and parties who take note of what people like me have to say. 3. Most politicians and parties ignore the opinions of people like me. 4. Most politicians and parties usually pay attention to the opinions of people like me.

Know_1 – Know_4 Now, we present a number of statements about the extent to which politicians and political parties know your interests and preferences. Can you indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements?

1. There is not a single politician or party who knows what goes on among people like me. 2. There are politicians and parties who are informed about what people like me want.* 3. Most politicians and parties do not have a clue about what is important for people like me.* 4. Most politicians and parties do know the interests and preferences of people like me.

Act_1 – Act_4 Now, we present a number of statements about the extent to which politicians and political parties act in your interests and according to your preferences. Can you indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements?

1. There is not a single politician or party who really takes action to defend to interests and preferences of people like me. 2. There are politicians and parties who do act in the interest and according to the preferences of people like me.* 3. Most politicians and parties neglect the interests and preferences of people like me when they take action. 4. Most politicians and parties do try to act in line with what is important for people like me.*

Succ_1 – Succ_4 Lastly, we present a number of statements about the extent to which politicians and political parties also succeed in translating your interests and preferences into policy. Can you indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements?

1. There is not a single politician or party who succeeds in realising the things that are important for people like me.* 2. There are politicians and parties who do manage to make policy reﬂect the preferences of people like me. 3. Most politicians fail to translate the preferences of people like me into policy. 4. Most politicians and parties generally succeed in making policy that addresses the issues that are important to people like me.*

Note: Items with an * are the items retained in the shortened six-item scale.

REPRESENTATION 641

an unrealistically personal manner, e.g., asking whether representative are informed about what I want. The ‘people like me’ phrasing circumvents this problem.

Data and Procedure

In order to conﬁrm the hypothesised multidimensionality of feeling represented, the 16-item measure was included in two surveys, conducted over the course of four months. Replication with multiple samples was done to demonstrate stability and robustness of the results (Schreiber, Nora, Stage, Barlow, & King, 2006). The ﬁrst survey was conducted online in August 2021 among a sample of Flemish respondents that regularly participate in survey research of the University of Antwerp (N = 3118). This sample is not representative for the Flemish population (overrepresentation of men, the elderly, higher educated and politically interested), but is derived from a diverse and large pool of participants (over 40,000 participants). We could consider this sample to be a ‘most-likely-case’ to ﬁnd evidence for the multidimensionality of feeling represented, as we might expect that politically interested citizens are more sensitive to distinctions between representatives’ behaviour. To examine whether such distinctions are also made by citizens more generally, the measure was also included in a second survey which was conducted online in October/November 2021 among a representative sample of both Flemish and Walloon citizens (N = 1825). This survey was initiated by a consortium of ﬁve universities1 and is representative for the Belgian population in terms of gender, age and level of education. Descriptive statistics of socio-demographic variables for both samples can be found in Appendix 2 (Tables A2 and A3). Belgium makes a good case to analyse the dimensionality of feeling represented. First, Belgians (both in Flanders and Wallonia) show levels of political trust comparable to other Western European countries (ESS, Round 9). Second, Belgium has strong populist/radical parties (both a national left-wing and Flemish regional right-wing party) with rising support based on the most recent 2019 election results (Pilet, 2021). This also points to potential roots for low political support and signs of political discontent. Third, Belgium has a highly fragmentated multiparty system. Such a party system is especially suited to examine diﬀerences between the extent to which people feel represented by either some or most representatives, as an electoral system with many options increases the likelihood of someone feeling represented by at least some politician or party (Blais et al., 2014), though Holmberg (2020) did not ﬁnd major diﬀerences between electoral systems when it comes to feeling represented by a party. I evaluate the instrument to measure feeling represented in two ways. First, I evaluate the internal structure of the scale by doing conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) in Mplus with both samples. Speciﬁcally, I test whether the 16 items load onto the two dimensions as they are theorised to – with eight factors, being the feeling that some representatives (1) listen, (2) know, (3) act, (4) succeed, and the feeling that most representatives (5) listen, (6) know, (7) act, (8) succeed. Second, I test the construct validity of the scale by examining whether the dimensions relate to other variables – other indicators of political discontent and voting intention – as they are theoretically expected to. For demonstrating construct validity, only the results of the representative sample are reported in the main text, while the non-representative sample is used as robustness test.

642 A. DE MULDER

Results

Internal Structure

To test the hypothesis that there are two dimensions underlying feeling represented, CFA was conducted on both the non-representative and representative sample. As the observed variables are measured with Likert-type scales, weighed least squares estimation was used (Kline, 2015). Besides the hypothesised model with eight factors, a competing one-factor model (all 16 items loading on a single latent factor) was tested. To evaluate the internal structure, I ﬁrst look at model ﬁt statistics as a ﬁrst indication of whether the eight-factor model ﬁts the data better than the unidimensional model. Thereafter, I examine factor loadings and correlations between the diﬀerent theoretical dimensions. As suggested by Schreiber et al. (2006), three goodness of ﬁt indices were used. The root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) is considered to indicate good ﬁt of the model when the result is .06 or lower (Hu & Bentler, 1999), though Marsh, Hau, and Wen (2004) suggest that a result of .08 reﬂects acceptable ﬁt. The comparative ﬁt index (CFI) and the Tucker-Lewis index (TLI) reﬂect acceptable ﬁt when above .90 and good ﬁt when above .95 (Matsunaga, 2010). Table 3 reports the model ﬁt statistics. For the non-representative sample, the eight-factor model has acceptable to good ﬁt on all statistics (RMSEA = .077; CFI = .988; TLI = .981), while the one-factor model does not meet the required cut-oﬀin terms of RMSEA (RMSEA = .107; CFI = .968; TLI = .963). For the representative sample, the eight-factor model shows acceptable ﬁt in terms of CFI and TLI, but not for RMSEA (RMSEA = .106; CFI = .910; TLI = .900), while the one-factor model has bad ﬁt on all statistics (RMSEA = .116; CFI = .852; TLI = .830). Examining the output revealed some error covariance between the items that were positively phrased in the survey. By allowing covariances between the positively phrased items, model ﬁt of the models improved. Speciﬁcally, the eight-factor model showed acceptable to good ﬁt on all statistics for both the non-representative (RMSEA = .056; CFI = .995; TLI = .990) and representative sample (RMSEA = .078; CFI = .964; TLI = .922), while the one-factor model of both samples still did not show acceptable ﬁt on at least one statistic. This result provides a ﬁrst indication that, for both samples, the data ﬁt the hypothesised eight factor model better than a unidimensional model. Nevertheless, the eight-factor model does not ﬁt the data perfectly. In order to rule out alternative solutions, four additional models were tested. Speciﬁcally, I ran a four-factor model with each behaviour (listen vs. know vs. act vs. succeed) on a separate factor; a two-factor model with an input factor (listen and know) and an output factor (act and succeed); a two-factor model distinguishing between a some-factor and most-factor;

Table 3. Model ﬁt indices.

Sample Model RMSEA (<.08) CFI (>.90) TLI (>.90)

Regional (N = 3118) One-factor .107 .968 .963 + error covariance .117 .970 .957 Eight-factor .077 .988 .981 + error covariance .056 .995 .990 National (N = 1825) One-factor .116 .852 .830 + error covariance .095 .921 .886 Eight-factor .106 .910 .900 + error covariance .078 .964 .922

REPRESENTATION 643

and lastly, a four-factor model distinguishing between ‘some-input’, ‘some-output’, ‘most-input’ and ‘most-output’. Testing these alternative solutions provides further evidence that the eight-factor model ﬁts the data best. That is, for both the non-representative and representative sample the alternative solutions all do not meet acceptable cut-oﬀ criteria in terms of RMSEA, while some also do not meet the criteria in terms of TLI. The results of these models are provided in Appendix 3. I further examined the internal structure of the eight-factor model by looking at the standardised parameter estimates (factor loadings) (Tables A5 and A6 in Appendix 4). For both samples, all items load substantially (loadings higher than .66) on their hypothesised latent factors, providing further evidence that the measurement model supports the theory. Also, we are interested in how strongly these factors correlate with each other. Although we can expect (and would want) that diﬀerent aspects of feeling represented correlate with each other to a certain extent, we do not want the factors to be overly correlated as this would suggest that the distinctions might not be very useful for empirical research. Table 4 gives an overview of the correlations between the latent factors for the non-representative sample (in bold) and the representative sample (in italics). The correlations range from .353 (between ‘some know’ and ‘most succeed’) to .757 (between ‘most act’ and ‘most succeed’). Overall, correlations reﬂect the hypothesised theoretical relations. First, the lowest correlations are between factors that concern a diﬀerent element of the ‘representative actor’ – between some and most. This indicates that citizens indeed make a strong distinction between feeling represented by some and most respectively. Also, I ﬁnd logical diﬀerences between the elements of the ‘representative behaviour’: the perception that representatives know correlates strongest with whether they listen and act, and less with whether they succeed. Succeeding, in its turn, correlates strongly with acting. Also notable is that listening has strong correlations with acting, reﬂecting the behavioural component of the ﬁrst. In other words, although the eight factors of feeling represented correlate with each other, they are at least partly independent and correlate in theoretically sound ways.

Construct Validity

Besides evaluating the internal consistency of a scale, a proper assessment of a scale also needs to take into account whether it displays construct validity – that is, it behaves in a way consistent with theoretical hypotheses. The question here is whether a scale ‘works at predicting something that the given concept would most certainly predict’ (Castanho Silva et al., 2020, p. 417). I test this by correlating the scale to (1) other indicators of

Table 4. Correlations among latent factors for representative and non-representative sample.

Factor Some listen Some know Some act Some succ. Most listen Most know Most act Most succ.

Some listen 1 0.674 0.684 0.578 0.574 0.472 0.511 0.424 Some know 0.601 1 0.666 0.551 0.498 0.617 0.490 0.396 Some act 0.653 0.619 1 0.690 0.509 0.483 0.583 0.485 Some succ. 0.596 0.547 0.696 1 0.553 0.496 0.625 0.651 Most listen 0.571 0.399 0.512 0.552 1 0.664 0.747 0.653 Most know 0.465 0.612 0.485 0.515 0.551 1 0.661 0.560 Most act 0.496 0.410 0.581 0.602 0.694 0.554 1 0.757 Most succ. 0.389 0.353 0.469 0.597 0.605 0.487 0.655 1

Note: Non-representative sample = bold; representative sample = italics; all loadings are signiﬁcant at p < .01 level.

644 A. DE MULDER

political discontent, and (2) citizens’ voting intention. For clarity of the text, only the results of the representative sample are reported in the main text in this section. However, replication of these analyses with the non-representative sample indicates that the ﬁndings are robust (see Appendix 5).

Correlations with Established Measures of Political Discontent The surveys contained a number of well-established measures of political discontent. First, external eﬃcacy was measured using the NOCARE- and NOSAY-items of the American National Election Study (ANES)(Cronbach’s alpha = .739). Political trust was measured as in the European Social Survey (ESS) by asking people on a scale from 0 to 10 how much they trust politicians, political parties, the federal parliament and the federal government (Cronbach’s alpha = .955). Populist attitudes were measured using four statements proposed by Akkerman et al. (2014) and one statement from the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) (Cronbach’s alpha = .721). Lastly, the representative survey also included the question of the CSES about whether one feels a party ‘represents their views’. This question was not included in the non-representative survey, though. Full question wording can be found in the Appendix 6. First, the external eﬃcacy scale has moderate positive correlations – between .29 and .47 – with the four factors measuring whether some representatives listen, know, act and succeed (Table 5). Correlations are more substantial for two factors: the perception that most representatives listen and act, with correlations above .53. This is in line with what we would expect. Speciﬁcally, the NOSAY-eﬃcacy item deals with whether one believes to have an inﬂuence on – ‘a say about’ – representatives’ actions, and thus relates to perceptions about whether or not representatives listen, but also about whether they will act accordingly. In parallel, the NOCARE-item also goes beyond perceptions about listening, as ‘caring’ about what someone thinks also implies that you ﬁnd this opinion important or valuable (Esaiasson et al., 2015) and are motivated to act in line with this opinion (McDonald, 2021). Furthermore, as the items deal with rather general (or at least ambiguous) (Craig et al., 1990) political objects (‘the government’ and ‘public oﬃcials’) it is logical that it correlates more strongly to feeling represent by most than it does to feeling represented by some. Similarly, we would expect the political trust scale to have stronger correlations with feeling represented by most than it does with feeling represented by some, as the scale concerns diﬀuse political actors and institutions (‘politicians’, ‘parties’, ‘parliament’ and ‘government’). Yet, as Dunn (2015) previously demonstrated, political trust

Table 5. Bivariate correlations of dimensions of feeling represented with other indicators of political discontent (representative sample).

External eﬃcacy Political trust Populism Feeling rep. CSES

Some listen .340 .429 −.345 .422 Some know .299 .350 −.321 .380 Some act .419 .450 −.409 .424 Some succeed .463 .500 −.464 .357 Most listen .534 .553 −.518 .281 Most know .364 .426 −.414 .257 Most act .536 .576 −.518 .286 Most succeed .492 .505 −.473 .200

Note: All correlations are signiﬁcant at p < .01.

REPRESENTATION 645

should also show positive (albeit weaker) correlations with feeling represented by some. The results in Table 5 reﬂect these expectations with correlations ranging between .42 and .58 for factors about feeling represented by most, and between .35 and .50 for feeling represented by some. Third, as the populist attitudes-scale deals with the opposition between ‘politicians’ (as a class) and ‘the people’ (Castanho Silva et al., 2020), we would expect it to correlate negatively with feeling represented, and especially with perceptions about most representatives. I ﬁnd that all eight factors are indeed negatively correlated with populist attitudes, with the factors about most representatives having the strongest correlations. Lastly, while the previous indicators were all expected to correlate more strongly with feelings about most representatives, the question of the CSES speciﬁcally concerns whether or not some party is perceived to ‘represent your views’ and should therefore mainly correlate with the factors about some representatives. Indeed, the results in Table 5 indicate that the CSES-question has stronger correlations with the factors about some than those about most representatives. Moreover, the CSES-question predominantly correlates with listening and acting by some. Whether or not representatives are perceived to know one’s interests or succeed in translating one’s interests into policy has (slightly) weaker correlations, indicating that these aspects of representation are less top of mind when answering the general, unidimensional question.

Correlations with Voting Intention Besides the relation to other indicators of political discontent, we can expect citizens’ feeling of being represented to diﬀer depending on their vote intention. For one, people who support a party in government (governmental winners) will probably feel better represented than people who support a party that does not (governmental losers) (Singh et al., 2012). Especially, the latter will be less satisﬁed about the extent to which the representatives they support succeed in weighing on the actual policy. Second, in line with Blais et al. (2014), I expect that people who do not feel represented by anyone will be more likely to vote blank or abstain, which in the Belgian context of compulsory voting could be seen as equivalent. Respondents’ voting behaviour was measured by asking respondents for which party they would vote if federal elections were held today. Looking at citizens’ current vote intention was preferred over a retrospective question about the party one voted for during the last election, as the ﬁrst provides the most current reﬂection of the party one supports. Responses to this question were recoded into three dummy variables. First, respondents who intended to vote for a party that, at the time of the survey, was part of either the federal government coalition or the regional government coalition (Flemish or Walloon government) were coded as government winners2 (N = 796). People who intended to vote for a party not in government were coded as governmental losers (N = 463). In practice, due to the composition of the government coalitions, this category predominantly (85,7%) comprised voters of populist left-wing party PvdAPTB and populist right-wing party Vlaams Belang. The last category contained respondents who indicated that they would vote blank or abstain (N = 218). ‘Don’t know’ answers were coded as missing data.

646 A. DE MULDER

Table 6 shows that the diﬀerent aspects of feeling represented relate to vote intention as we would theoretically expect. First, governmental winners positively correlate with all aspects of feeling represented. Governmental losers, in contrast, are negatively correlated with feeling represented by most representatives. This is in line with the ‘winner-loser’literature that ﬁnds that supporting the winning party leads to more positive attitudes towards politics, while supporting the losing party has the converse eﬀect (Singh et al., 2012). Also, in line with my expectations, governmental losers negatively correlate with the extent to which some representatives are perceived to succeed in weighing on policy, while they do not correlate signiﬁcantly with the other aspects of feeling represented by some. In other words, people who support a party that does not make it into government will generally feel less well-represented in terms of the eﬀectiveness or success, but might still feel represented by a party or politician in other ways. Further, I ﬁnd that voting blank/abstaining is negatively correlated with all aspects of feeling represented, with correlations being strongest for the factors about some representatives. Put diﬀerently, the better people feel represented by at least some politicians, the less likely they are to abstain. When we compare this to how more established survey questions of political discontent relate to people’s vote intention (see Table 6), the added value of the multidimensional measure of feeling represented becomes more apparent. Speciﬁcally, as political trust, external eﬃcacy and populism all deal with diﬀuse political objects, they are unable to distinguish the dissatisfaction felt by blank voters from that of voters of opposition parties (governmental losers). Speciﬁcally, while both groups are dissatisﬁed with the way most representatives represent them, opposition voters are not signiﬁcantly dissatisﬁed with the way some representatives listen, know and act. This is not picked up by traditional measures of political discontent. The unidimensional CSES question, in its turn, is unable to distinguish the feeling of being represented felt by governmental winners from that of governmental losers, as both groups have similar positive correlations with the question (after all, both groups may feel represented by at least some representatives). The main diﬀerentiating characteristic between governmental and opposition voters – the feeling that your preferred representatives do or do not succeed in weighing on policy – is not registered by the CSES question.

Table 6. Bivariate correlations between dimensions of feeling represented, indicators of political discontent and voting intention (representative sample).

Government vote Opposition vote Blank/no vote

Some listen .199*** −.004 −.190*** Some know .171*** .000 −.161*** Some act .213*** −.043 −.193*** Some succeed .237*** −.085** −.168*** Most listen .235*** −.168*** −.113*** Most know .182*** −.098** −.096*** Most act .240*** −.172*** −.120*** Most succeed .198*** −.158*** −.088** External eﬃcacy .189*** −.156*** −.086*** Political trust .381*** −.205*** −.218*** Populism −.193*** .198*** .061** Feeling rep. CSES .235*** .129*** −.250*** Note: ***Correlation signiﬁcant at < .001 level, **correlation signiﬁcant at .01 level, *correlation signiﬁcant at .05 level.

REPRESENTATION 647

A 6-item Scale for Survey Research

Although the results support that feeling represented can and should be measured as a multidimensional construct, I do acknowledge that a 16-item measure is too demanding for regular use in often already full-packed surveys. Therefore, a shorter 6-item version of the scale may be used without losing too much information. Speciﬁcally, in the 16-item scale, both a positive- and a negative item was used for each of the eight combinations of the two dimensions. Considering the relatively high factors loadings, only one item per combination would suﬃce, already reducing the number of items by halve. Also, although the CFA conﬁrms the analytical distinctions between the eight factors, the listening component does correlate quite heavily with both acting and knowing. I propose a battery consisting of the items Know 2 and 3, Act 2 and 4, and Succeed 1 and 4 (items with an asterisk in Table 2). Relating these items to the other indicators of political discontent and voting intention leads to similar results as the 16 item-measure (see Appendix 7, Tables A10 and A11).

Conclusion and Discussion

Although the question of whether or not citizens feel well-represented by their representatives is at the heart of representative democracy, surprisingly few studies have focused on conceptualising feeling represented, and rarely have these feelings been measured in a proper and systematic way. This article contributes to the literature in both respects. First, building on Pitkin’s (1967) concept of substantive representation and Norris’ (1999) and Golder and Stramski’s (2010) diﬀerentiation between representatives, a multidimensional conceptualisation of feeling represented is oﬀered. This conceptualisation distinguishes between the representative behaviour that citizens perceive: whether or not citizens have the feeling that politicians are listening to them, know their interests, act in accordance to their interests, and succeed in translating their interests into policy. In addition, it distinguishes between who is perceived as enacting (or not enacting) this behaviour, either some representatives or most representatives. Combining these two dimensions allows various ways to think about and analyse citizens’ feeling of being represented, going beyond dichotomously classifying citizens as either feeling represented or not. The second aim of this paper was to develop a measuring instrument that is able to measure these dimensions of feeling represented empirically. Concretely, I developed a 16-item measure of feeling represented and then tested this measure in two surveys with Belgian citizens. In a ﬁrst step, the internal consistency of this measure was demonstrated by doing conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and examining factor loadings. Second, correlations of the measure with other indicators of political discontent and citizens’ vote intention provided further evidence of construct validity. These analyses indicate that feeling represented can and should be measured as a multidimensional concept, as the two dimensions and its sub-elements are at least partly independent of each other and have diﬀering relations with relevant variables such as vote intention and types of political discontent. Furthermore, the results suggest that the multidimensional measure of feeling represented also has empirical value over existing indicators of political discontent (such

648 A. DE MULDER

as external eﬃcacy or populist attitudes) and the feeling represented question developed by the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES). As this article demonstrates, feeling represented is complex, and people who feel represented in one respect might feel unrepresented in another. However, because the existing indicators only partially tap into one or two aspects of feeling represented, they obscure some of the diﬀerences that can exist between relevant groups in society and which may explain their political behaviour. For instance, people can feel very badly represented by most politicians, yet still feel well-represented by some of them, which as this article shows is typical for supporters of populist parties and opposition parties (governmental losers). Traditional indicators are unable to distinguish these citizens from citizens who do not feel represented by any representatives. However, the latter’s feeling of complete neglect leads them to vote blank or abstain, while the former are likely to vote. Similarly, the CSES question does not register what diﬀerentiates governmental winners from – losers in terms of feeling represented: while both groups might feel well-represented by some party in terms of listening, knowing or acting, the latter are much more dissatisﬁed with the extent to which their preferred representatives succeed in weighing on policy. This may again have consequences for citizens’ political behaviour. Although a more sophisticated analysis of how citizens may diﬀer in terms of feeling represented an how it may predict diﬀerent types of political behaviour is beyond the scope of this article, the multidimensional measure that is tested and validated in the article does allow to do such analyses in the future and can thereby help to better understand the current ‘crisis of representation’. The proposed multidimensional measure has some limitations, though. First, a 16item scale is quite demanding for regular use in survey research. Therefore, an alternative 6-item version of the scale was proposed that taps into the most important distinctions. Second, the proposed measure is rather catered to a Belgian context in which both politicians and political parties are the main representative actors (Werner, 2019). Nevertheless, with small adaptations, the scale may easily be used beyond the Belgian context. Most importantly, depending on the political context (or one’s research objectives), the type of representatives in the items can be altered (e.g., only politicians or only parties, party leaders, or even non-elected representatives such as civil society actors).

Notes

1. The RepResent Consortium is a collaboration between ﬁve Belgian universities (UA, KUL, UCLouvain, VUB, ULB). For more information, see URL (accessed 1 December, 2021): https://represent-project.be/ 2. In the Belgian political system, determining whether a party is or is not in government is not entirely straight-forward, as federal and regional governments may diﬀer in their composition. In this article, the least strict deﬁnition is applied: if a party is in either the federal or regional government, it is considered a government party. I redid the analysis applying a stricter deﬁnition (only federal government), and this led to similar results as only one party (N-VA) shifted from government to opposition.

Disclosure Statement

No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).

REPRESENTATION 649

Funding

This work was supported by the University of Antwerp under internal grant FFB200323.

Notes on contributor

August De Mulder is a PhD student at the Department of Political Science at the University of Antwerp, as part of the M2P research group. His main research interests focus on political communication and political representation. E-mail: August.DeMulder@uantwerpen.be

ORCID

August De Mulder http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6346-9610

References

Akkerman, A., Mudde, C., & Zaslove, A. (2014). How populist are the people? Measuring populist attitudes in voters. Comparative Political Studies, 47(9), 1324–1353. Almond, G., & Verba, S. (1963). The civic culture. Political attitudes and democracy in ﬁve nations. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Blais, A., Singh, S., & Dumitrescu, D. (2014). Political institutions, perceptions of representation, and the turnout decision. In J. Thomassen (Ed.), Elections and representative democracy: Representation and accountability (pp. 99–112). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Burke, E. (1854). Speech to the electors of Bristol at the conclusion of the poll. In The works of the right Honourable Edmund Burke, volume 1 (pp. 446–448). London: Henry G. Bohn. Castanho Silva, B., Jungkunz, S., Helbling, M., & & Littvay, L. (2020). An empirical comparison of seven populist attitudes scales. Political Research Quarterly, 73(2), 409–424. Chamberlain, A. (2012). A time-series analysis of external eﬃcacy. Public Opinion Quarterly, 76 (1), 117–130. Craig, S. C., Niemi, R. G., & Silver, G. E. (1990). Political eﬃcacy and trust: A report on the NES pilot study items. Political Behavior, 12(3), 289–314. Disch, L. (2015). The “constructivist turn” in democratic representation: A normative dead-end? Constellations (Oxford, England), 22(4), 487–499. Dovi, S. (2012). The good representative. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. Dunn, K. (2015). Voice, representation and trust in parliament. Acta Politica, 50(2), 171–192. Easton, D. (1965). A systems analysis of political life. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Esaiasson, P., Kölln, A. K., & Turper, S. (2015). External eﬃcacy and perceived responsiveness— Similar but distinct concepts. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 27(3), 432–445. Eulau, H., & Karps, P. D. (1977). The puzzle of representation: Specifying components of responsiveness. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 2(3), 233–254. Gamson, W. A. (1968). Power and discontent. Homewood, IL: Dorsey. Giger, N., Kissau, K., Lutz, G., & Rosset, J. (2009). Explaining the variance of subjective and substantive representation. In ECPR General Conference 2009. Potsdam, Germany. Golder, M., & Stramski, J. (2010). Ideological congruence and electoral institutions. American Journal of Political Science, 54(1), 90–106. Holmberg, S. (2020). Feeling represented. In R. Rohrschneider & J. Thomassen (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of political representation in liberal democracies (pp. 413–434). New York: Oxford University Press. Hooghe, M., & Marien, S. (2013). A comparative analysis of the relation between political trust and forms of political participation in Europe. European Societies, 15(1), 131–152. Hosking, G. (2019). The decline of trust in government. In M. Sasaki (Ed.), Trust in contemporary society. Series in comparative social studies (pp. 77–103). Leiden: Brill.

650 A. DE MULDER

Hu, L. T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoﬀcriteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 6(1), 1–55. Inglehart, R., & Norris, P. (2016, August). Trump, Brexit, and the rise of populism: Economic have-nots and cultural backlash (HKS Working Paper No. 26). Kline, R. B. (2015). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York: Guilford Publications. Kriesi, H., & Schulte-Cloos, J. (2020). Support for radical parties in Western Europe: Structural conﬂicts and political dynamics. Electoral Studies, 65, 102–138. Lapinski, J., Levendusky, M., Winneg, K., & Jamieson, K. H. (2016). What do citizens want from their member of congress? Political Research Quarterly, 69(3), 535–545. Lavi, L., Treger, C., Rivlin, N., Sheafer, T., Waismel-Manor, I., Shenhav, S., … Shamir, M. (2021, April). The Pitkinian public: Representation in the eyes of citizens. Retrieved from SSRN: https:// ssrn.com/abstract=3835506. Lombardo, E., & Meier, P. (2018). Good symbolic representation: The relevance of inclusion. Political Science & Politics, 51(2), 327. Mansbridge, J. (2003). Rethinking representation. American Political Science Review, 97(4), 515–528. Marsh, H. W., Hau, K. T., & Wen, Z. (2004). In search of golden rules: Comment on hypothesistesting approaches to setting cutoﬀvalues for ﬁt indexes and dangers in overgeneralizing Hu and Bentler’s (1999) ﬁndings. Structural Equation Modeling, 11(3), 320–341. Matsunaga, M. (2010). How to factor-analyze your data right: Do’s, don’ts, and How-to’s. International Journal of Psychological Research, 3(1), 97–110. McDonald, J. (2021). Who cares? Explaining perceptions of compassion in candidates for oﬃce. Political Behavior, 43(4), 1371–1394. Miller, A. H., & Listhaug, O. (1990). Political parties and conﬁdence in government: A comparison of Norway, Sweden and the United States. British Journal of Political Science, 20(3), 357–386. Minta, M. D. (2009). Legislative oversight and the substantive representation of Black and Latino interests in Congress. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 34(2), 193–218. Mudde, C. (2004). The populist zeitgeist. Government and Opposition, 39(4), 541–563. Norris, P. (1999). Introduction: The growth of critical citizens? In P. Norris (Ed.), Critical citizens: Global support for democratic government (pp. 1–30). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Peress, M. (2013). Candidate positioning and responsiveness to constituent opinion in the US house of representatives. Public Choice, 156(1-2), 77–94. Pilet, J. B. (2021). Hard times for governing parties: The 2019 federal elections in Belgium. West European Politics, 44(2), 439–449. Pitkin, H. F. (1967). The concept of representation. Berkeley: University of California Press. Rehfeld, A. (2006). Towards a general theory of political representation. The Journal of Politics, 68 (1), 1–21. Saward, M. (2006). The representative claim. Contemporary Political Theory, 5(3), 297–318. Saward, M. (2010). The representative claim. New York: Oxford University Press. Schreiber, J. B., Nora, A., Stage, F. K., Barlow, E. A., & King, J. (2006). Reporting structural equation modeling and conﬁrmatory factor analysis results: A review. The Journal of Educational Research, 99(6), 323–338. Schulz, A., Müller, P., Schemer, C., Wirz, D. S., Wettstein, M., & Wirth, W. (2018). Measuring populist attitudes on three dimensions. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 30 (2), 316–326. Singh, S., Karakoç, E., & Blais, A. (2012). Diﬀerentiating winners: How elections aﬀect satisfaction with democracy. Electoral Studies, 31(1), 201–211. Stimson, J. A., MacKuen, M. B., & Erikson, R. S. (1995). Dynamic representation. American Political Science Review, 89(3), 543–565. Thomassen, J., & Van Ham, C. (2017). A legitimacy crisis of representative democracy? In C. Van Ham, C. J. Thomassen, K. Aarts, & R. Andeweg (Eds.), Myth and reality of the legitimacy crisis: Explaining trends and cross-national diﬀerences in established democracies (pp. 3–16). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

REPRESENTATION 651

Vega, A., & Firestone, J. M. (1995). The eﬀects of gender on congressional behavior and the substantive representation of women. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 20(2), 213–222. Wahlke, J. C. (1967). Public policy and representative government: The role of the represented. Iowa City: University of Iowa. Werner, A. (2019). Voters’ preferences for party representation: Promise-keeping, responsiveness to public opinion or enacting the common good. International Political Science Review, 40(4), 486–501.

Appendices

Appendix 1 Table A1. Original question wording of the 16 feeling represented items in Dutch and French.

Variable Dutch version French version List_1 – List_4 Nu willen we u enkele vragen stellen over de mate waarin u zich vertegenwoordigd voelt door politici en politieke partijen. Eerst leggen we u een aantal stellingen voor over de mate waarin politici en partijen naar u luisteren.

1. Er is geen enkele politicus of partij die luistert naar mensen zoals ik. 2. Er zijn politici of partijen die aandacht hebben voor wat mensen zoals ik te zeggen hebben. 3. De meeste politici en partijen negeren de opinies van mensen zoals ik. 4. De meeste politici en partijen letten doorgaans op de meningen van mensen zoals ik.

A présent nous souhaiterions vous poser quelques questions sur la manière dont vous vous sentez représenté par les hommes et femmes politiques et par les partis politiques. D’abord, nous allons vous présenter une série d’aﬃrmations sur la manière dont les hommes et femmes politiques et les partis politiques vous écoutent.

1. Il n’y a pas un seul homme ou femme politique ou parti politique qui écoute les gens comme moi. 2. Certains hommes et femmes politiques ou certains partis politiques tiennent compte de ce que les gens comme moi ont à dire. 3. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques ignorent les opinions des gens comme moi. 4. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques accordent de l’attention aux opinions des gens comme moi.

Know_1 – Know_4 Nu leggen we u een aantal stellingen voor over de mate waarin politici en partijen uw politieke belangen en voorkeuren kennen.

1. Er is geen enkele politicus of partij die weet wat er leeft onder mensen zoals ik. 2. Er zijn politici of partijen die eﬀectief op de hoogte zijn van wat mensen zoals ik willen. 3. De meeste politici en partijen hebben geen idee van wat belangrijk is voor mensen zoals ik. 4. De meeste politici of partijen kennen wel degelijk de belangen en voorkeuren van mensen zoals ik.

A présent, nous allons vous présenter une série d’aﬃrmations sur la manière dont les hommes et femmes politiques et les partis politiques connaissent vos priorités et préférences.

1. Il n’y a pas un seul homme ou femme politique ou parti politique qui soit au courant de ce qui se passe dans la vie de gens comme moi. 2. Certains hommes et femmes politiques ou certains partis politiques sont au courant de ce que les gens comme moi veulent. 3. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques n’ont aucune idée de ce qui est important pour des gens comme moi. 4. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques savent quelles sont les priorités et préférences des gens comme moi.

Act_1 – Act_4 Nu leggen we u een aantal stellingen voor over de mate waarin politici en partijen handelen in uw belang en volgens uw voorkeuren.

A présent, nous allons vous présenter une série d’aﬃrmations sur la manière dont les hommes et femmes politiques et les partis politiques agissent dans votre intérêt et selon vos préférences.

(Continued)

652 A. DE MULDER

Table A1. Continued.

Variable Dutch version French version 1. Er is geen enkele politicus of partij die echt actie onderneemt om de belangen en voorkeuren van mensen zoals ik te verdedigen. 2. Er zijn wel degelijk politici of partijen die handelen in het belang en volgens de voorkeuren van mensen zoals ik. 3. De meeste politici en partijen verwaarlozen de belangen en voorkeuren van mensen zoals ik wanneer ze actie ondernemen. 4. De meeste politici en partijen proberen wel degelijk te handelen in lijn met wat belangrijk is voor mensen zoals ik.

1. Il n’y a pas un seul homme ou femme politique ou parti politique qui agisse pour défendre les intérêts et préférences des gens comme moi. 2. Certains hommes et femmes politiques ou certains partis politiques agissent dans l’intérêt et selon les préférences des gens comme moi. 3. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques négligent les intérêts et les préférences des gens comme moi lorsqu’ils agissent. 4. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques essaient d’agir dans l’intérêt et selon les préférences de gens comme moi.

Succ_1 – Succ_4 Tenslotte leggen we u een aantal stellingen voor over de mate waarin politici en partijen er ook echt in slagen om uw voorkeuren en belangen om te zetten in beleid.

1. Er is geen enkele politicus of partij die er in slaagt om de zaken te verwezenlijken die belangrijk zijn voor mensen zoals ik. 2. Er zijn wel degelijk politici of partijen die er voor zorgen dat de voorkeuren van mensen zoals ik ook echt in het beleid worden weerspiegeld. 3. De meeste politici of partijen falen om de voorkeuren van mensen zoals ik ook daadwerkelijk om te zetten in beleid. 4. Over het algemeen lukt het de meeste politici en partijen om beleid te maken dat de zaken aanpakt die belangrijk zijn voor mensen zoals ik.

Enﬁn, nous allons vous présenter une série d’aﬃrmations sur la manière dont les hommes et femmes politiques et les partis politiques parviennent à traduire vos intérêts et préférences en décisions politiques.

1. Il n’y a pas un seul homme ou femme politique ou parti politique qui arrive à concrétiser des décisions sur ce qui est important pour les gens comme moi. 2. Certains hommes et femmes politiques ou certains partis politiques parviennent à concrétiser en décisions politiques les intérêts et préférences de gens comme moi. 3. La plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques ne parviennent pas à concrétiser les intérêts et préférences de gens comme moi en décisions politiques. 4. En général, la plupart des hommes et femmes politiques et des partis politiques réussissent à élaborer des politiques qui abordent les questions importantes pour les gens comme moi.

Appendix 2 Table A2. Descriptive statistics of socio-demographics for non-representative sample (N = 3118).

Variable Category/mean Percentage/std. deviation Age 18–29 4.2% 30–44 12.8% 45–64 43.6% 65+ 39.4% Gender Man 71.0% Woman 28.7% Education No/primary/lower secondary education 6.4% Secondary education 21.9% Higher education 71.6% Political interest M = 7.92 Std. dev. = 1.69

REPRESENTATION 653

Table A3. Descriptive statistics of socio-demographics for representative sample (N = 1825).

Variable Category/mean Percentage/ std. deviation Age 18–29 15.6% 30–44 21.5% 45–64 35.7% 65+ 27.2% Gender Man 49.2% Woman 50.6% Education No/primary/lower secondary education 19.0% Secondary education 42.5% Higher education 38.5% Political interest M = 5.29 Std. dev. = 2.949

Appendix 3 Table A4. Model ﬁt indices of the alternative models.

Sample Model RMSEA (<.08) CFI (>.90) TLI (>.90) Regional (N = 3118) Four-factor (behaviours) .101 .974 .968 + error covariance .103 .977 .967 Two-factor (input/output) .105 .970 .965 + error covariance .111 .972 .961 Two-factor (some/most) .097 .975 .970 + error covariance .102 .976 .967 Four-factor (input/output & some/most) .094 .977 .972 + error covariance .097 .980 .970 National (N = 1825) Four-factor (behaviours) .114 .867 .837 + error covariance .097 .919 .881 Two-factor (input/output) .111 .872 .843 + error covariance .099 .910 .876 Two-factor (some/most) .111 .865 .843 + error covariance .095 .917 .885 Four-factor (input/output & some/most) .085 .939 .906 + error covariance .095 .922 .886

Appendix 4 Table A5. Standardised factor loadings for eight-factor model with unrepresentative sample (N = 3118).

Factor Some listen Some know Some act Some succ. Most Listen Most know Most act Most succ. Item L_1 0.927 L_2 −0.794 K_1 0.938 K_2 −0.774 A_1 0.935 A_2 −0.877 S_1 0.913 S_2 −0.888 L_3 0.900 L_4 −0.872 K_3 0.956 K_4 −0.823 A_3 0.935 A_4 −0.902 S_3 0.919 S_4 −0.883

Note: All loadings are signiﬁcant at p < .001 level.

654 A. DE MULDER

Table A6. Standardised factor loadings for eight-factor model with representative sample (N = 1825).

Factor Some listen Some know Some act Some succ. Most Listen Most know Most act Most succ. Item L_1 0.826 L_2 −0.736 K_1 0.847 K_2 −0.661 A_1 0.816 A_2 −0.765 S_1 0.799 S_2 −0.757 L_3 0.811 L_4 −0.760 K_3 0.800 K_4 −0.675 A_3 0.755 A_4 −0.765 S_3 0.663 S_4 −0.724

Note: All loadings are signiﬁcant at p < .001 level.

Appendix 5 Table A7. Bivariate correlations of dimensions of feeling represented with other indicators of political discontent (non-representative sample).

External eﬃcacy Political trust Populism Feeling rep. CSES Some listen .510 .470 −.408 Not included Some know .492 .444 −.443 Some act .504 .481 −.404 Some succeed .548 .524 −.433 Most listen .676 .609 −.552 Most know .568 .492 −.503 Most act .641 .611 −.516 Most succeed .587 .581 −.463

Table A8. Bivariate correlations between dimensions of feeling represented, indicators of political discontent and voting intention (non-representative sample).

Government vote Opposition vote Blank/no vote Some listen .242*** −.026 −.237*** Some know .219*** −.012 −.165*** Some act .227*** −.041* −.216*** Some succeed .291*** −.153*** −.165*** Most listen .353*** −.303*** −.149*** Most know .306*** −.256*** −.125*** Most act .342*** −.286*** −.146*** Most succeed .308*** −.247*** −.140*** External eﬃcacy .309*** −.248*** −.152*** Political trust .370*** −.271*** −.199*** Populism −.308*** .294*** .129*** Feeling rep. CSES Not included

REPRESENTATION 655

Appendix 6 Table A9. Established measures of political discontent.

Variable Items External eﬃcacy Can you indicate the extent to which you agree with the statements below? [1 = Totally disagree; 5 = Totally agree]

1. People like me don’t have any say about what the government does. 2. I don’t think public oﬃcials care much what people like me think.

Political trust Can you indicate on a scale from 0 to 10 how much you personally trust each of the following institutions? [0 = No trust at all, 10 = Full trust]

1. Political Parties 2. The Federal Parliament 3. The Federal Government 4. Politicians

Populist attitudes Can you indicate the extent to which you agree with the statements below? [1 = Totally disagree; 5 = Totally agree]

1. Politicians in parliament must follow the advice of the people. 2. Political opposition is greater between elites and citizens than between citizens among themselves. 3. I would rather be represented by an ordinary citizen than by a professional politician. 4. What people call ‘compromise’ in politics is really just selling out on one’s principles. 5. Most politicians do not care about the people

Feeling represented Would you say that any of the parties in Belgium represents your views reasonably well? [1 = yes; 2 = no; 3 = don’t know]

Appendix 7 Table A10. Correlation of six-item scale with indicators of political discontent.

External eﬃcacy Political trust Populism Feeling rep. CSES Non-representative sample Know 2 .359 .329 −.304 Not included Act 2 .436 .421 −.332 Succeed 1 .527 .500 −.430 Know 3 .575 .503 −.537 Act 4 .591 .579 −.459 Succeed 4 .555 .565 −.426 Representative sample Know 2 .165 .324 −.172 .350 Act 2 .334 .455 −.303 .427 Succeed 1 .429 .343 −.455 .246 Know 3 .361 .318 −.429 .151 Act 4 .432 .578 −.408 .284 Succeed 4 .409 .556 −.384 .243

Note: All correlations are signiﬁcant at p < .01.

Table A11. Correlation of six-item scale with voting intention.

Item Government vote Opposition vote Blank/no vote Non-representative sample Know 2 .149*** −.019 −.155*** Act 2 .203*** −.026 −.211*** Succeed 1 .274*** −.164*** −.143*** Know 3 .314*** −.268*** −.113*** Act 4 .321*** −.273*** −.134*** Succeed 4 .292*** −.246*** −.128***

(Continued)

656 A. DE MULDER

Table A11. Continued.

Item Government vote Opposition vote Blank/no vote Representative sample Know 2 .153*** .019 −.150*** Act 2 .222*** −.031 −.206*** Succeed 1 .170*** −.087*** −.092*** Know 3 .140*** −.096** −.053* Act 4 .259*** −.171*** −.129*** Succeed 4 .223*** −.135*** −.144** ***Correlation signiﬁcant at <.001 level, **correlation signiﬁcant at .01 level, *correlation signiﬁcant at p .05 level.

REPRESENTATION 657