See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/287005544

Citizens’ attitudes towards democratic deliberation

Article  in  Portugese Journal of Social Sciences · October 2012

DOI: 10.1386/pjss.11.2.161_1

CITATION 1

READS 151

2 authors, including:

Susana Santos

Iscte – University Institute of Lisbon

32 PUBLICATIONS   53 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Susana Santos on 16 May 2016.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

161

PJSS 11 (2) pp. 161–178 Intellect Limited 2012

Portuguese Journal of Social Science Volume 11 Number 2

© 2012 Intellect Ltd Article. English language. doi: 10.1386/pjss.11.2.161_1

José Manuel Leite Viegas CIES, Instituto Universitário de Lisboa, ISCTE-IUL, Lisboa

Susana Santos CIES, Instituto Universitário de Lisboa, ISCTE-IUL, Lisboa

Citizens’ attitudes towards democratic deliberation*

Abstract

The economic and social crises the Western democracies are currently experiencing have aggravated ideological polarisation and increased citizens’ distrust of both poli­ ticians and political institutions. As a result, it has become increasingly difficult to obtain consensus just at the moment when it is most needed in order to put into effect those reforms the situation demands. It is in this context that studies of democratic deliberation gain new relevance and significance, particularly within parliaments, which are the places, par excellence, for political debate and consensus building. However, democratic deliberation requires more than just institutions, rules and regulations: it requires a political culture that is imbued with these principles and values, that is to say, it need citizens and political actors with positive attitudes towards the various dimensions of democratic deliberation. The results obtained here point in the general direction of support for the different aspects of deliberation, both in the attitudes of the citizens’ and the deputies, indicating some very specific differences between each of them.

Introduction

The deliberative process has been one of the most debated themes in research on democracy since the end of the 1980s. Returning to the discussion on how democracy functions can be explained in two ways: the fall of the self-styled

Keywords

deliberation political attitudes political debate

* Translated from the

Portuguese by Stewart Lloyd-Jones (stewart@ cphrc.co.uk).

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

162

‘popular democracies’ of Eastern Europe, which resulted in the disappearance of a competitive counterpoint to the liberal democracies and, from another perspective, the depletion of minimalist state guidelines that dominated in the democracies that developed from the end of the 1970s.

The return to the state has manifested itself in the renewed importance conferred upon those mechanisms that govern democracies, particularly the representation, deliberation and political decision-making processes.

For Dalton, Scarrow and Cain (2004), the proposals that have emerged since the 1960s, which sought to improve the quality of democracy, have developed within three fields: the system of political representation, which seeks to improve this process; in the experiences and proposals for direct democracy; and, finally, in the reforms that tend to encourage different forms of political participation, whether by groups or individuals, in a model that the authors label ‘advocacy democracy’. The conceptions of democratic delibera­ tion quite clearly fall into this latter field.

The debate began with Habermas’ (1991 [1962]; 1996b) and Cohen’s (1989) essentially theoretical proposals for democratic deliberation. This delib­ eration was defined as a model of discussion between diverse participants with each speaking in terms of the common good all the while taking the interventions of the other participants into consideration, with all seeking to reach a consensus.

Cohen (1989: 22–3) defined the criteria behind this concept of deliberation as ‘freedom’, that is, the possibility for each of the participants in the debate to speak without coercive restrictions; ‘the rationality of the debate’, meaning that the debate’s outcome will be the position that includes the best argu­ ments in terms of the ‘common good’; ‘equality’, in that each participant has equal status; and, finally, ‘consensus’, which is achieved by incorporating each participant’s best contributions.

Many other authors express criticism from this point, questioning the concept and its scale, its validity, the possibility of deliberation being viable in a real political struggle, and its contribution to democracy. Some of the collective publications and academic articles that critique the literature on deliberation give an account of the proliferation of contributions (Macedo 1999; Warren 2002; Drysek 2000; Fishkin and Laslett 2003; Chambers 2003; Guttman and Thompson 2004; Mansbridge et al. 2006).

In the empirical field, studies conducted at the international level range from the psycho-social analysis of deliberation in small groups, particularly juries or experimental groups, to, on a more comprehensive and political scale, an analysis of debates in parliament and other political bodies (Steiner et al. 2004; Naurin 2007; Luskin, Fishkin and Jowell 2002; Ryfe 2002; 2005; Carpini, Cook and Jacobs 2004; Gastil 2008).

This article has theoretical and empirical goals. In order to achieve the former we will propose a concept of democratic deliberation and its dimen­ sions, which takes the initial proposals advanced by Habermas and Cohen into consideration while also including later critical contributions. For the latter, empirical goal, we will analyse the attitudes of citizens in relation to this normative model of deliberation, considering separately each one of the previously established dimensions of the concept.

Why the interest in capturing the attitudes of citizens towards democratic deliberation? The importance of dialogue and the striving for consensus is a matter that has been studied extensively in the literature on the welfare state, particularly on that part relating to social concertation (Ashford 1986;

163

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

Esping-Anderson 1991). The importance of this is analysed both from the aspect of the legitimation of democratic institutions and in terms of the gains in governmental efficiency. However, as we shall see below, the social dialogue of concertation is based on bargaining, that is to say, on the search for common ground between the many private interests (Steiner et al. 2004). It presupposes that there is something to distribute, to increase global wealth. However, in the present period of economic crisis, deliberation need not necessarily rely on haggling over the distribution of increased resources, but rather in the search for consensual economic and social solutions resulting from the best presented arguments.

The deliberative process is not restricted to political bodies, such as parliaments. In fact, deliberation takes place at many levels of society; however, public support for these processes has greater significance when related to bodies of democratic power. It is difficult for a political body, such as a parliament in which different groups and social interests are represented, to operate according to the normative model of democratic deliberation if this model does not have the general support of the people.

We begin with the theoretic clarification of the concepts, in particular the concept of democratic deliberation. Having introduced the critiques of the initial proposals put forward by Habermas and Cohen we then suggest and defend a definition of deliberative democracy that is very close to that formulated by Chambers (2003) while also considering the dimensions of the concept to be empirically operationalised. We then move on to present the goals and methodology used in this study, complete with an empirical analysis that consists of a study of citizens’ attitudes in relation to deliberation, based on the data from a survey of a representative sample of citizens in continental Portugal. Following this we will present our conclusions.

Democratic deliberation: Critical analysis of a concept

The acceptance of a plurality of opinions, interests and directions in democratic and liberal societies has, from the outset, raised the problem of how to take decisions that bind the whole population. It is noted that, in democracy, at stake is not only acceptance of differences, particularly difference of opinion, but also the recognition that all citizens have something to say, directly or indirectly, in relation to political decisions.

It is true that the rule of the majority, which was instituted as a fundamen­ tal precept of democracy, seems to resolve the problem. In fact, with there not being any criteria for absolute truth, and with each individual being equal in their status as citizens, within the public and political sphere decisions can only be made on the basis of the support of the largest number of citizens.

Acceptance of the rule of the majority enables an attenuation of the reaction of those who were defeated; that is, it contributes towards the legitimation of majority decisions without, however, ensuring their wisdom. For this reason, democratic institutions will vote following a discussion on the matters for which a decision must be made. This, without speaking of other mechanisms designed to attenuate the blind application of the rule of the majority, such as the elaboration of constitutional texts that are less prone to fluctuations of opinion, the demands of enhanced majorities, mechanisms or processes of appeal and others that we have no space to discuss here.

We need to be clear that the rule of the majority is used to resolve the problem of the plurality of positions when the time comes to reach a decision while

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

164

1. Criticism of this

institutional model centre on resolving the problems of governability, problems that can only be overcome with a culture that is highly ‘accommodating’.

democratic deliberation is applied earlier, that is, during the discussion between those participating in the debate and who may (or may not) change the direction of the debate. In this sense, deliberation does not directly oppose the rule of the majority, but rather rational choice theory, which assumes individuals start out with an opinion based on their own interests, and that collective positions are only the result of an aggregation of preferences (Knight and Johnson 1994).

According to rational choice theory individuals always act in a way to maximise their gains, which results, politically, in the pure logic of represen­ tation. As interests are many and varied, the reach of the debate conducted prior to reaching a decision remains very limited, to the extent that there is no recognition of the existence of a ‘common good’ around which the partici­ pants can base their reasons. The understandings or agreements remain, to a large extent, limited to the confluence of positions: in other words, to an aggregation of interests.

Nevertheless, several authors have noted that the process of interest and preference aggregation cannot be reduced to electoral processes or parlia­ mentary tactics, but that these agreements suffer from a lack of discussion and the formation of platforms for understanding (Barber 1984; Drysek 2000; Drysek and List 2003; Chambers 2003). ‘Deliberative democracy is not usually thought of as an alternative to representative democracy. It is rather an expan­ sion of representative democracy’ (Chambers 2003: 308).

The crisis of democracy during the inter-war years that in many cases led to their collapse is evidence of the limits of procedural rules based on political representation and the legitimation of majorities. The more polarised political and party currents were confronted, without hope of reconciliation, without any attempt or desire to seek platforms for understanding.

The social dialogue of ‘concertation between capital and labour’ during the post-Second World War period sought a practical social agreement; that is, none of the parties sought to convince the others of the need for a particu­ lar model of society, or even concerning the concept of the ‘common good’. It was understood that each had their interests, which were essentially irrecon­ cilable (at least at the beginning; later, with the success of the welfare state, the very idea of society became unifying). However, this did not stop the search, through bargaining, for compromises, particularly for sharing the increases in productivity between capital and labour (Mishra 1990; Ashford 1986; EspingAnderson 1991).

‘Social concertation’ is the institutionalisation of the dialogue between social partners, within the process of which the state can play a greater or lesser interventionist role. This process is based on dialogue and negotiation in the search for solutions that are acceptable to all concerned. During the bargaining process, each party can give ground on some points, and gain on others on the understanding that agreement is worth more than stalemate.

Perhaps at the political level, some of the models and rules of operation will favour the development of a political culture of accommodation and the search for consensus. In this position are those political systems with the following four characteristics: (1) proportional representation for parliamen­ tary elections; (2) the existence of two chambers in which controversial deci­ sions can be re-examined; (3) politically federal or highly decentralised; (4) institutional escalation of decisions resulting in re-examination of those taken at a lower level. The system in the Netherlands is the one most commonly noted as containing examples of the institutions and cultures that function, and very well, according to this consensus-seeking model.1

165

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

2. According to Habermas

(1996a), his proposal for deliberative democracy, while further from the liberal than from the republican model, also differs from this by the critical distancing relative to the ‘ethical overload’ of the republican model.

The deliberative model shares some of the principles of the ‘social concertation’ model: an appreciation of dialogue and discussion; the search for solutions that are a result of the contribution of all participants; and the search for consensual solutions.

It is necessary, however, to stress that the ‘accommodation’ found in the deliberative democracy model is, at least partly, different from that in the clas­ sical and historical ‘social concertation’ of the welfare state model (Steiner et al. 2004).

In the concertation model, the understanding results from the bargaining: that is, each one defends a position that best represents their interests. When ground is ceded on one point it is not necessarily because of any recognition that the arguments of others may be better or worse, but rather because there is always a concern to reach a common solution. The giving of ground on some issues is justified by the expectation of gaining ground on others. The search for a broader range of positions is also achieved through the aggrega­ tion of interests.

In the deliberative model the arguments are organised and explained in logical terms, eventually with some clear empirical support that notes its contribution to the common good. The final position may include the arguments of several of the participants, but to the extent that they were considered by all to be the most valid rather than as the result of a calcu­ lated bargain.

In this process there are information gains, because each participant agrees to share information and also to recognise the gains that result from the discussion of ideas. Refutation is based solely on the ideas expressed by the other, and not on the destruction of their credibility, and is organised in a logical manner and with respect for the empirical data.

It is clearly evident that, with its belief in reason and in the possibility that through reason and with the participation of all one can arrive at a just idea, the deliberative model is the heir of the republican ideal and, further back, of the Enlightenment.2

There is no consensus among all of the authors participating in this debate about the integration of the ‘common good’ into the deliberative model. There are different reasons for this to be the case: some because they defend intran­ sigently pluralist positions (Warren 2002), others because they believe that deliberation tends to blur differences of interests and to legitimise hegemonic forms of the common good (Sanders 1997).

We believe, in first place, these objections can be overcome were we to consider that democratic deliberation represents an abstract model of discus­ sion, in the Weberian sense of the term, which, in the political and social real­ ity, would have to coexist with other equally valid principles, particularly the representation of interests.

In second place, it must be said that the ‘common good’ may mean different things to each of the participants on any deliberative forum. What the deliberative model demands is that the arguments employed by each participant are not organised simply in terms of the advantages for any partic­ ular faction, but rather in terms of the gains for society as a whole.

The republican current, and the generality of the conceptions of participatory democracy, have always valued the debate as an important aspect of democracy in action. Therefore we can say that, at first glance, democratic deliberation fits into this political current. Looking closer, it very well might not be like this (Habermas 1996a).

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

166

3. For example, the

operating model of the British parliament before the 19th century.

For many of the participative currents, from the historical movements calling for the vote for the working class during the 19th and 20th centuries to the many different radical left-wing groups that emerged after the Second World War, the appeal of participation had more to do with the question of representation and the increase of the political-electoral power of the lower classes. The interests and positions of those intervening were clear and welldefined from the outset and there was no expectation that the discussion would lead to any substantial change to these positions. Political discussion was valued because it was believed that it would increase the awareness of the individuals from the exploited classes about the problems affecting them.

It is in this context that we must understand the opposition to the theory of deliberation expressed by those authors who claim politics is confrontation and political struggle and not a discussion between academics. Those who are marginalised, dominated or in any way socially disadvantaged must be able to have their voices heard, must present their ‘live stories’, to strengthen the posi­ tions of their group and not to allow themselves to be caught up in the logic of deliberation, which demands symbolic resources that they often lack (Sanders 1997; Knight and Johnson 1997; Young 2000).

The demands of consensus politics, expressed for example by Cohen (1989: 23), plays to the advantage of installed interests since those who both want and need change have the greatest difficulty obtaining a consensus. In order to corroborate this thesis, the authors mentioned above note the histori­ cal predecessors of consensus, which includes many conservatives and very few democrats.3

The definitions of deliberation evolved according to the critiques that were made to the initial proposals advanced by Habermas (1996b) and Cohen (1989). It is easy to see that, according to the critiques, the more polemical parts of the initial definition relate to the criteria ‘common good’ and ‘consensus’.

In an attempt to overcome these difficulties, Chambers defined deliberation as ‘debate and discussion aimed at producing reasonable, well-informed opinions in which participants are willing to revise preferences in light of discussion, new information, and claims made by fellow participants’. Questions concerning consensus and the common good are less prominent, but they remain present when he adds that ‘Although consensus need not be the ultimate aim of deliberation, and participants are expected to pursue their interests, an overarching interest in the legitimacy of outcomes (understood as justification to all affected) ideally characterises deliberation’ (Chambers 2003: 30). While stated in a weak manner, the second part of the definition seems essential otherwise it would completely undermine the core of the initial proposal.

Therefore we propose the following definition of democratic deliberation as:

a process of debate and discussion in which each of the participants are equal in terms of status and right of expression, where they take into consideration the information and arguments of the other participants in the debate as seek to arrive at a consensus that includes the best of each participant’s contributions in respect of the common good.

If we are speaking of deliberative processes in organs of power within a representative democracy, one of the problems we will face is the possible conflict between representation and deliberation. That is to say, how can a member of a democratic representative body – a parliamentary deputy, for

167

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

example – be both free to change their mind during a debate by accepting some of the arguments made by their opponents (as demanded by the logic of deliberation) while at the same time acting as a representative of others, in terms of the set of interests and values that they represent?

We should recall that democratic deliberation is defined in normative terms, and not as a concept that characterises any given reality. In the exam­ ple of representative democracies there can be some conflict between the representation of interests or values and the open character of deliberation. It is because of this that the more recent formulations of deliberation, partic­ ularly those that we have chosen as our reference (Chambers 2003), allow participants to defend specific interests since they are also concerned with considering common interests.

For the purpose of our study we will leave to one side the definition of democratic deliberation presented above. However, we recognise that some points remain unclear, particularly where Chambers speaks about the goal of reaching ‘reasonable positions’. The search for consensus is also presented ambiguously. Nevertheless, the core of the definition is clearly stated, and it is this that we will examine in quantitative terms.

Empirical studies on deliberation generally report on the deliberative processes, both those that take place in real political life and those that are take place in an experimental context. In this exercise, what we propose to do is somewhat different: we want to capture the attitudes of citizens towards democratic deliberation, outside of any actual deliberative context.

Assessments of democratic deliberation resulting from this conceptual framework develop in three dimensions: (1) attitudes towards political partici­ pation; (2) attitudes towards the discussion of political matters; and (3) atti­ tudes towards the rules of the deliberative debate (see Figure 1).

The first dimension emerges prior to the deliberative process and relates to those who are participating in the process. Within this are two subdimensions: the opening to citizens and voluntary organisations to political participation and the recognised virtues, or not, of this enlarged participation (see Figure 1).

It is important to consider this dimension, by the closing characteristics of the deliberative group that characterises the historical experiences of delibera­ tion. The modern resurgence of the concept emphasises the value of enlarged participation, even in the context of representative democracy.

The second aspect to be considered refers to the ‘attitudes towards political debate’. We recall that political debate, understood as the exchange of views between many participants, all of whom in all good faith respect, and seek, the best solution, which is at the heart of the definition of deliberation. We will examine three sub-dimensions of this: the first, which measures the respondent’s practice of democratic debate; the second, which assesses the respondent’s powers of persuasion; and the third and final, the value, or lack thereof, placed on public debates.

The last of the aspects of democratic deliberation proposed above, ‘attitudes towards the rules of deliberative debate’, will be broken down into two sub-dimensions: respect for other participants in the debate, and a second that seeks to evaluate the respondent’s support for the ‘principle of accommodation’.

Having introduced the concept of deliberative democracy and its dimensions, we are ready to move towards outlining the research goals and the methodological and technical methods employed.

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

168

4. The sample consisted

of individuals aged between 18 and 70 and residing in continental Portugal. The sample size was 1,000, and was representative of the Portuguese population, sorted by region and habitat. The data was undertaken as part of the ‘Participation and democratic deliberation’ research project (PDD 2005–08), co-ordinated by José Manuel Leite Viegas.

5. The sample size was

1,350 individuals aged between 18 and 70 and living in continental Portugal. The sample was sorted by region and habitat and the data gathered during 2008. The

Figure 1: Analytical diagram of the dimensions and sub-dimensions of the deliberative democracy concept.

Attitudes towards deliberation: Aims, methodology and empirical results

The main goal of the scientific research underlying this text is to know in what aspects and to what extent citizens support or oppose the democratic delib­ eration processes. This question can be split into more specific points: do citi­ zens recognise the virtues of the deliberative process, and if so, which? Do they recognise any drawbacks, and if so, what are they? To what extent do they agree or disagree with each of these aspects of deliberation? Finally, it would be interesting to know whether deliberative processes are viewed posi­ tively or negatively overall.

To analyse citizens’ attitudes we conducted a survey of a representative sample of the population of continental Portugal in 2006.4 The questionnaire included several indicators that operationalised the sub-dimensions of the concept of deliberation. In 2008 one part of the indicators of the concept of deliberation was applied in a new survey questionnaire distributed to a repre­ sentative sample of the Portuguese population (Freire, Viegas and Seiceira 2009).5

The closeness in time between the two surveys prevents us from drawing any grand conclusions in evolutionary terms; however, we do have data from

169

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

survey was part of the ‘Portuguese deputies in comparative perspective: Elections, leadership and representation processes’ research project (PTDC 2007–10), which was led by André Freire and José Manuel Leite Viegas.

6. This difference is not

statistically significant: Z = 1,020877 α = 0.05

two different surveys, which although not sharing the full set of indicators used, allows us to guarantee the data’s reliability and assess whether there is a pattern in the attitudes in relation to democratic deliberation.

We contend this analysis of attitudes towards deliberation is a gain for empirical research, one that is limited to citizens but which whenever possible compares the results of the 2006 survey with those of the 2008 survey. It is interesting to establish whether we are witnessing a pattern of consistent atti­ tudes that can define part of the citizens’ cultural policy. This line of research in studies on deliberation does not seek to replace the analysis of deliberative processes as they occur in reality within the political institutions, but rather is looks to assess potential citizen support for these processes, taking the purely attitudinal aspects into account.

As we noted above, there are three dimensions, or assessment fields, to the attitudes on deliberation: (1) attitudes towards political participation; (2) attitudes towards the discussion of political matters; and (3) attitudes towards the rules of the deliberative debate.

1. Attitudes towards political participation

In order to measure citizens’ attitudes towards political participation we use three indicators: the first evaluated the degree of acceptance, or rejection, of independent candidates in elections for deputies to parliament (Assembly of the Republic); the second measures levels of agreement, or disagreement, with the participation of citizens or the representatives of voluntary organisa­ tions in the political decision-making process; the third indicator assesses this same agreement (or disagreement) with letting associations be heard, but this time at the local level; finally, the last indicator evaluated the agreement, or disagreement, with the disadvantages of consulting with citizens when seek­ ing to introduce reforms.

Here we present the empirical results of the first indicator (see Table 1). The data shows that there is a large degree of support for citizen participation through the presentation of independent candidates in elections to parliament with 68 per cent of respondents in 2006 and 66 per cent in 2008 stating they would be in favour of changing the law to make this possible.6

The results in respect of the evaluation of consulting citizens before political bodies make decisions are shown in Table 2. Generally speak­ ing, much importance is placed on the participation of citizens and asso­ ciations in the political decision-making process (75 per cent of positive responses).

2006 (N=1000) 2008 (N=1350)

Agree 68 66 Disagree 14 12 No reply 18 22

Source: PDD (2006); PTDC (2008). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 1: Degree of support or opposition to the possibility of allowing independent groups of citizens stand as candidates for parliament (%)*.

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

170

7. Z = 4,3343623 α = 0.05

The support for popular consultation during the political decision-making process must, however, be put in context by looking at the results of the final indicator, which are presented in Table 2.1. This shows that 52 per cent of the respondents in 2006 and 43 per cent in 2008 agreed that decision-making could be blocked were citizens and associations to be consulted before imple­ menting any reforms; however, this difference is not statistically significant.7

Two notes on this point: the number of individuals who agreed fell by almost 9 per cent between 2006 and 2008, which could indicate an increase in support for citizen consultation and participation in political decision-mak­ ing. Could it be that the citizens, within a set of necessary reforms, would seek to attenuate the implications of the changes by being less opposed to the government negotiating with different private interests? This is something that needs to be examined in closer detail.

A second note, which stresses that what seems to be behind this objection is the systemic, and perhaps excessive, nature of these consultations, rather than the principle underlying them, which the indicators above shows has a high level of support.

2. Attitudes towards political discussion

A second aspect to be examined relates to attitudes towards political discus­ sion. There are three sub-dimensions to this: the practice of political discus­ sion, measured by an indicator of the frequency of political discussion in daily life (in the family, at work and amongst friends); the second is the power of persuasion in political discussion, which is also measured with an indicator of frequency; the third, appreciation of the debates and political information, measure by three indicators (two relating to an evaluation of parliamentary debates and television in providing clarification to citizens and one that meas­ ures the extent to which people follow political events on television).

Agree Disagree No reply

2006 Survey (N=1000) 75 9 16

Source: PDD (2006) * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 2: Degree of agreement or disagreement with the statement: ‘Information provided by citizens and associations is essential to the political decision-making process’* (%).

Agree Disagree No reply

2006 Survey (N=1000) 52 30 18 2008 Survey (N=1350) 43 33 24

Source: PDD (2006); PTDC (2008). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 2.1: Degree of support for or opposition to the statement: ‘To consult individuals and associations in all situations would lead to politicians not introducing any reforms’* (%).

171

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

Table 3 shows that, in general terms, individuals do not spend much time discussing political matters, with only 4–6 per cent saying they often discuss matters of this nature. From an analysis of the kind of people who do discuss politics, it is clear that it is in more private or intimate situa­ tions these discussions are more likely to take place. In fact, people are less likely to discuss politics when they are with colleagues, with only 32 per cent of respondents admitting to have had conversations of this nature, and then generally only within this social environment. Family and friends show results that are very similar, and generically greater, to the results for discussions with work colleagues, occurring in these circles of interaction for about 40 per cent of respondents.

The practice of persuasion implies a greater degree of involvement in the discussion. In relation to those who discuss politics, we note that only 35 per cent of respondents do so with some or much frequency (Table 4). Therefore, we can confirm that discussion of political matters mainly involves the exchange of ideas and, to a lesser extent, an attempt to convince others to change their way of thinking.

Finally, in the ‘attitudes towards political discussion’ we have yet to analyse the three indicators relating to the sub-dimension ‘evaluation of debates’. The

Frequency with which an individual discusses political matters with …

Friends Family Colleagues

Never 28 27 36 Rarely 32 33 31 Sometimes 34 35 28 Often 6 5 4 No reply 1 1 1

Source: PDD (2006). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 3: Frequency with which an individual discusses political matters with friends, family and colleagues* (%).

Frequency with which the individual persuades …

2006 Survey

(%)

Never 32 Rarely 32 Sometimes 31 Often 4 Don’t know/No reply 1

Source: PDD (2006); N = 1000. * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 4: Frequency with which an individual persuades their friends, family or colleagues* (%).

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

172

8. This difference is not

statistically significant: Z = -10,6405499 = 0.05

9. Z = -3,84615 α = 0.05

two former indicators assess the contribution of parliamentary debates and television towards clarifying matters for the citizens. The results show that respondents place a positive value on these debates, although we note that the proportion of those who agree that the contribution these debates make towards explaining matters to citizens is around 63 per cent in the case of parliamentary debates and 83 per cent in the case of discussions on television.

The last indicator in this dimension relates to the frequency with which political events are accompanied on the television (Table 6). Around half of the respondents, 50 per cent in 2006 and 53 per cent in 2008, follow politi­ cal events either on a daily basis or several times per week. If we also include those who follow politics at least once a week, the proportion rises to 66 per cent in 2006 and 85 per cent in 2008.8 These are the citizens, accounting for more than two-thirds of the population, we may regard as being at least mini­ mally aware of political events. The difference noted between the 2006 and 2008 surveys allows us to state that the proportion of such citizens has risen during the period in question.

The practice of following politics on the internet is still residual, although it increased slightly between 2006 and 2008 (Table 7). In 2006 only 5 per cent of respondents used the internet to obtain information about political events, a figure that had risen to 9 per cent by 2008; nevertheless, this difference is not statistically significant.9 However, aware of the explosion in the use of social networks during the second decade of this century, we believe the current proportion of people using the internet for political news will be very much greater.

What conclusions can we reach from a reading of this set of indicators of ‘attitudes towards political discussion’?

Agree Disagree No response

2006 (N=1000) 63 23 14 2008 (N=1350) 58 30 12

Source: PDD (2006); PTDC (2008). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 5: Degree of agreement or disagreement with the statement ‘Debates in parliament contribute towards clarifying matters for the citizen’* (%).

2006 (N=1000) 2008 (N=1350)

Never 14 7 Less than once a week 20 8 Once or twice a week 16 12 Several times a week 19 17 Every day 31 56 No reply 1 0

Source: PDD (2006); PTDC (2008). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 6: Frequency with which you follow political events on television (%)*.

173

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

10. Z = 1,941697805 α = 0.05.

In first place, we must distinguish the passive approval for and political debate from the low proportion of those who get actively involved in the debate. Value is given to the idea of consulting citizens, although there is also recognition of the inconvenience an excess of this can cause; however, the effort to be informed, to participate and to attempt to convince others only involves around one-third of the population.

The distancing of some citizens from the political debate does not necessarily mean that they are opposed to this aspect of political deliberation, it could simply signal their political disaffection. Anyway, this disaffection can never be an active support for democratic deliberation.

3. Attitudes towards the rules of the deliberative debate

In relation to the last of the dimensions considered, ‘attitudes towards the rules of the deliberative debate’, two of the three theoretically considered subdimensions were examined: respect for other participants in the debate, and the respondents’ adherence to the ‘accommodation principle’.

Respect for others is measured using a variable of 11 positions in which ‘0’ is defined by ‘in the democratic debate each person can interrupt the other in order for there to be a lively discussion’ to ‘10’, which is defined as ‘in the democratic debate each must be heard without interruption, absorbing what has been said and only speaking later’. This latter position on the scale corre­ sponds to the deliberative position, with the former being the opposite, as it is related in the critiques of the deliberative model.

Figure 2 shows the proportion of responses for each of the 11 positions on the scale, with average values and standard deviations indicating that there are no statistically significant differences.

If we add the percentages found in positions 6–10 on the scale, which are closer to the extreme of ‘not interrupting others during the debate’, we see that the majority of respondents, around 60 per cent, place themselves closer to the democratic deliberation model. In 2008 the results were slightly different, with 55 per cent of respondents placing themselves more in favour of no interruptions (Table 8); however, this difference is not statistically significant.10

In order to measure the degree of acceptance ‘of the principle of accommodation’, in the understanding of this concept in deliberative theory, of recognising the ideas of others when assessed as having a better theoretical

2006 (N=1000) 2008 (N=1350)

Never 82 77 Seldom 7 9 Once or twice a week 4 4 Several tmes a week 3 5 Every day 2 4 No reply 2 1

Source: PDD (2006); PTDC (2008). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 7: Frequency with which you follow political events on the internet (%)*.

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

174

Notes: (1) 2006 survey: average value = 6.52, standard deviation = 2.445. (2) 2008

survey: average value = 6.24, standard deviation = 2.463.

Figure 2: Respect for the rules on intervention in democratic debate (%).

Position with respect to interrupting others during a democratic debate

(2006, N=1000)

(2008, N=1350)

Interruptions are allowed to encourage lively debate (positions 0–4)

20 24

Neutral/equidistant position between the two extremes (position 5)

18 21

Interruptions are not allowed, with partici­ pants taking each other’s arguments into consideration (positions 6–10)

60 55

Don’t know/No reply 2 0

Source: PDD (2006); PTDC (2008). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 8: Respect for others during democratic debates* (%).

or empirical basis, the respondents were asked how often they change their minds after watching a televised debate.

Above we analysed the extent of the value the respondents placed on parliamentary and televised debates. Now we will analyse the consequences of having listened to these debates. Table 9 shows that only 23 per cent of respondents admitted to having changed their views, in some cases after having watched a political debate on television. Almost half said that they had never changed their mind after one of these debates. We could, therefore, say that we are confronted with a group of individuals who have little propensity for ‘accommodation’ in either their discourse or in that of others.

This is, perhaps, the aspect of democratic deliberation that is least accepted by the citizens. Moreover, it reflects the predominance of political discourse in the media and parliament – despite deputies displaying attitudes that move

175

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

in the opposite direction – which focuses its attacks on the individual or on collateral aspects to the detriment of objective arguments.

However, the reasons for the lack of a propensity for individuals to change their minds are varied, which, on the one hand could be understood as the subject’s inability to listen to others and to take their arguments into consider­ ation and incorporate them, while on the other, it could be due to the quality of the debate (the speakers’ oratorical skills, the topics being discussed, rules of the debate, etc.).

Conclusions

Having analysed the empirical data, what can we say in reply to the question: do Portuguese citizens support or oppose democratic deliberation’s values and processes? The answer, as could be guessed, is not straightforward. While we note the levels of approval for the idea that the structures of power should listen to citizens and social organisations, that parliamentary elections should be open to those who are not on party lists, the value attributed to televised debates and even respect for the rules of the deliberative debate, we would be able to reply ‘yes’: the majority of Portuguese are in agreement with these values and rules of deliberative democracy.

However, we can also note the other aspects of deliberation, principles of deliberation to which adherence is not quite so clear. In fact, despite believing political debates contribute towards clarifying matters for the ordinary citizen, very few Portuguese follow politics on television or the internet. This is also despite there being an increase in the proportion of citizens who follow poli­ tics through the audio-visual media. There are also few who discuss politics in different social environments, and there are fewer still who seek to persuade others.

The responses to the aspects relating to the rules of the political debate are also contradictory. On the one hand, as we noted above, the majority agree with the principle of ‘listening to the other and taking what they have to say into account before responding’; however, on the other hand, the proportion of those who admit to having changed their minds after a debate is very low.

What we can state is that support for democratic deliberation is also mainly passive and defensive. It requires openness and moderation, but it shows itself to be little disposed to apply these principles. The formal respect for the inter­ locutor is not realised through any actual consideration for what they say.

2006, N=1000

I never change my mind 44 Sometimes I change my mind 21 I often change my mind 2 I never watch televised political debates 26 No reply 7

Source: PDD (2006). * Percentages rounded to nearest whole number

Table 9: Frequency with which an individual changes their opinion following televised debates.

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

176

Given the two surveys took place within a short time of each other there is little we can say with regards to the development of attitudes. However, if there has been some change, it has tended towards an increase in the citi­ zens’ political involvement, which has manifested itself in the growth in use of television and the internet to follow politics.

Finally, it is worth noting that some of the dimensions of deliberation were not examined, particularly support for the prevalence of the ‘common good’ over private interests in political debate. Future research must overcome these absences and construct new indicators that will expand our understanding of citizens’ support of deliberative debate.

References

Ashford, D. (1986), The emergence of the welfare states, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Barber, B. (1984), Strong democracy, Berkeley, CA: University of California

Press. Carpini, M. X. D., Cook, F. L. and Jacobs, L. R. (2004) ‘Public deliberation,

discursive participation, and citizen engagement: A review of the empirical literature’, Annual Review of Political Science 7: 315–44. Chambers, S. (2003), ‘Deliberative democracy theory’, Annual Review of

Political Science 6: 307–26. Cohen, J. (1989), ‘Deliberation and democratic legitimacy’, in Hamlin, A. P.

and Pettit, P. (eds), The good polity, Oxford: Blackwell. Dalton, R. J., Scarrow, S. E. and Cain, B. E. (2004), ‘Advanced democracies

and the new politics’, Journal of Democracy 15 (1): 124–38. Drysek, J. S. (2000), Deliberative democracy and beyond: Liberals, critics, contesta­

tions, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Drysek, J. S. and List, C. (2003), ‘Social choice theory and deliberative demo­

cracy: A reconciliation’, British Journal of Political Science 33: 1–28. Esping-Anderson, G. (1991), The three worlds of welfare capitalism, London:

Polity. Fishkin, J. S. and Laslett, P. (eds) (2003), Debating deliberative democracy,

Oxford: Blackwell. Freire, A., Viegas, J. M. L. and Seiceira, F. (eds) (2009), ‘Inquérito à população

portuguesa: Base de dados’, in Freire, A., Viegas, J. M. L. and Seiceira, F. (eds), Representação política em Portugal: Inquérito e bases de dados, Lisbon: Sextante. Gastil, J. (2008), Political communication, London: Sage. Guttmann, A. and Thompson, D. (eds) (2004), Why deliberative democracy?

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Habermas, J. (1996a), ‘Three normative models of democracy’, in Benhabib,

S. (ed.), Democracy and difference: Contesting the boundaries of the political, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ——. (1996b), Between facts and norms: Contributions to a discourse theory of law

and democracy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ——. (1991 [1962]), The structure transformation of the public sphere: An inquiry

into a category of bourgeois society, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Knight, J. and Johnson, J. (1994), ‘Aggregation and deliberation: On the possi­

bility of democratic legitimacy’, Political Theory 22: 277–96. Knight, J. and Johnson, J. (1997), ‘What sort of equality does democratic deli­

beration require?’, in Rehg, W. and Bohman, J. (eds), Deliberative demo­ cracy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

177

Citizens’ attitudes towards …

Luskin, R. C., Fishkin, J. S. and Jowell, R. (2002), ‘Considered opinions:

Deliberative polling in Britain’, British Journal of Political Science 32 (3): 455–87. Macedo, S. (ed.) (1999), Deliberative politics: Essays on democracy and disagree­

ment, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Mansbridge, J., Hartz-Karp, J., Amengual, M. and Gastil, J. (2006), ‘Norms of

deliberation: An inductive study’, Journal of Public Deliberation 2 (1): 1–47. Mishra, R. (1990), The welfare state in capitalist society: Policies of retrenchment

and maintenance in Europe, North America and Australia, Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Naurin, D. (2007), ‘Why give reason? Measuring arguing and bargaining in

survey research, Swiss Political Science Review 13 (4): 559–75. PDD (2005–08), ‘Democratic participation and deliberation: Institutional

socio-political intermediaries (parties and associations), ideological chan­ ges and political behaviour’, project co-ordinated by José Manuel Leite Viegas. PTDC (2007–10), ‘Portuguese MPs in comparative perspective: Elections,

leadership and representation’, project co-ordinated by André Freire. Ryfe, D. M. (2002), ‘The practice of deliberative democracy: A study of 16 deli­

berative organizations’, Political Communication 19 (3): 359–77. ——. (2005), ‘Does deliberative democracy work?’, Annual Review of Political

Science 8: 49–71. Sanders, L. M. (1997), ‘Against deliberation’, Political Theory 25 (3): 347–76. Steiner, J., Bächtiger, A., Spörndli, M. and Steenbergen, M. R. (2004),

Deliberative politics in action, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Warren, M. (2002), ‘Deliberative democracy’, in Carter, A. and Stokes, G.

(eds), Democratic theory today, Cambridge: Polity. Young, I. M. (2000), Inclusion and democracy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

sugGested citation

Viegas, J. M. L. and Santos, S. (2012), ‘Citizens’ attitudes towards democra­

tic deliberation’, Portuguese Journal of Social Science 11: 2, pp.  161–178, doi: 10.1386/pjss.11.2.161_1

Contributor details

José Manuel Leite Viegas is associate professor with agrégation at the Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL, Lisboa) and director of the Department of Political Science and Public Policy and of the doctoral course in political science at ISCTE-IUL. He has been involved in scientific research in several aspects of politics, including: ideology and political attitudes, electoral absten­ tion, associative participation, social and political tolerance and, more recently, democratic deliberation. He has published widely in all of these areas.

Contact: Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), Avenida das Forças Armadas, Edifício ISCTE , 1649-026 Lisboa. E-mail: jmlv@iscte.pt Tel: +351 217903254 / +351 217903000 Fax: +351 217903017

Susana Santos is a postdoctoral research Fellow at CIES-IUL. She holds a doctorate from ISCTE-IUL (2012). The main theme of her thesis is media regulation, in which she explores the Portuguese Catholic broadcaster, Radio

José Manuel Leite Viegas | Susana Santos

178

Renascença. Her examination focuses on the relationship between the church, the state and the political parties, economic groups and media. Her research interests include: politics and citizenship, democratic deliberation, and politi­ cal communication and journalism. Her full CV can be found at www.cies. iscte.pt/investigadores/ficha.jsp?pkid=147&a=-2133130565.

Contact: CIES-IUL, Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), Avenida das Forças Armadas, Edifício ISCTE, 1649-026 Lisboa. E-mail: susanacsantos@iscte.pt Tel: +351 217903956 Fax: +351 217940074

José Manuel Leite Viegas and Susana Santos have asserted their right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as the authors of this work in the format that was submitted to Intellect Ltd.

Copyright of Portuguese Journal of Social Science is the property of Intellect Ltd. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

View publication stats