Understanding Parliamentary Trust in Italy

Between 2008-2012

Sebastian Pinstrup Jørgensen

Cristian Andres Castro

Sungpyo Hong

Nayara Helena Tambosi

Introduction 3

Methodology 5 Ontology 5 Research Design 6 Introduction - state of the art 6 Data Collection 8 Delimitations and Limitations 9

Theory Chapter 11 Parliamentary trust 11 Trust 11 Parliamentary trust 11 Eurobarometer: Sample and fieldwork data collection 12 Sampling 12 Interview 13 Operationalisation of the concept 13 Mediterranean Social Model 14

Literature review 19 State of the art 19 Division of power 2008 in Italy 19 Determinants of political and parliamentary trust. 20 Italian Historical review until 2008 23 Parliamentary history 23 Economic Crisis 27 Corruption 28

Analysis 30 Content Analysis 30 Document Analysis 33 New parliamentary election 34 Italy declared to be in Recession 34 A new Government - Berlusconi 35

Conclusion 38

2

Introduction

Many countries, particularly in Europe, are losing trust in established politicians and that

is why it is very relevant to do research into the consequences of a lack of trust. Mistrust is a

slippery concept which suggests very different things to different people. Social scientists are not

in agreement on the definition of mistrust, nor on what might be undermining it. Yet according to

Brosius, Erika and Vreese (2018) most people would agree that some kind of trust in the political

process is essential to a stable and prosperous society.

Our project is trying to find out how public trust in the parliament can effects society.

Trust in institutions is an important component of democratic societies, as it is essential for the

smooth operations of all interactions between governmental institutions and citizens. (Delhey

and Newton, 2003) ​Based on the Tripartition of power, the most fundamental institutions of state

are Parliament (legislative), Government (executive) and Judiciary. (Montesquieu, 1748)

Parliament is a decision-making body that plays a key role in a democratic society. From

legislation to policy and the national budget, they become representatives of citizens and

represent their positions. Trust in parliament reduces the overall cost of national governance and

increases efficiency. Therefore, Parliament itself and trust in it, are an indispensable component

of democracy. (Soren Holmberg et al, 2017). For that reason the institution which this project

will focus on, is this key actor of democracy: the parliament.

The recession in 2007/8 spurred on a deep downturn in parliamentary trust in many EU

countries, especially countries from southern Europe such as Spain and Greece were hit hard.

(Felix Roth, Sep 2015) These are countries which are often compared to Italy since they are

regional neighbours, and some would say they share the Mediterranean social model. (André

Sapir, 2006). Yet from 2008 to 2012 Italy parliamentary trust did not fall like other EU countries.

Actually they had a slight upturn in parliamentary trust between 2008 till 2010. (Felix Roth, Sep

2015). This makes the specifics of italian case very interesting, how come they did not

3

experience the same downturn in that time period? This is why this research will focus on the

time period spanning from the economic crisis 2007/2008 until 2012.

Italy has long been one of the EU countries with the lowest parliamentary trust, and

maybe not coincidentally also with a very low satisfaction in democracy. (Oecd insights, 1. Feb

2018). This makes Italy an interesting case for this project. There are also several recent political

choices on the international stage such as Italy choosing to join the silk road as the first G7

nation (BBC, 23 of March 2019) and internal politics, the fact that Italy has just chosen to reduce

the number of elected lawmakers by hundreds (Reuters Oct 8, 2019). All of these factors makes

parliamentary trust in Italy a very interesting case to research.

This project will through the ontology of constructivism look at how the citizens relation

with the parliament could have changed in those years, and try to answer the question:

“How has parliamentary trust been effected in Italy after the financial recession in 2007/08 till

2012?”

The way this research will try to answer this question is first through a literature review,

which will have the goal to understand which relations are important when understanding

parliamentary trust, and also to understand what is important when understanding Italy in regard

to parliamentary trust. After that a content analysis of relevant factors will be made, simply

trying to find which factors correlate with the 2008-2010 surge in parliamentary trust, and then a

document analysis/exploratory analysis trying to find which events could be related to the

changes in parliamentary trust, and which events best explain the differences. In the end a

conclusion will sum up our findings and show which further research is needed.

4

Methodology

Ontology

In order to establish from which point of view we will approach and research in this

project, we will do it from an empirical realism view of facts and reality (Bryman, 2012 pp

28-31). We are going to do it in this specific way because we choose to work upon cause-effect

ideas, particularly related to the causes of a specific reaction to the levels of parliamentary trust

from italian citizens between 2008 and 2012. Therefore we choose to work with the idea that

trust in the institutions in general and the possible causes for producing it, are able to analyse and

measure as facts.

This approach means that we will work assuming that the truth exists, and doesn't change

regarding who and how observes it. In addition to this, from this approach is expected to work

as the measurements are objective, and the expectation is to collect the information as accurate as

possible to what is out there in ‘the reality’. With all of this, it should be possible to be able to

generalize any kind of founding we will make here, because it should not be strongly effected by

this particular researchers. (Bryman, 2012 pp 28-31)

On the scale from objectivism to constructionism our project can be said to be

constructivist. This means that our ontology does not see cultures and institutions as being the

most important factor, or the “actor” that sets constraints which the social actors internalize. We

see social actors, such as citizens, as being active actors who create and recreate the culture and

institutions which they are a part of, in accordance with the writings of Bryman. (2016, pp

28-29). In actuality this means for our project that we are looking at the individuals, meaning in

this project the citizens, and not the culture in itself to understand what has effected

parliamentary trust.

5

Research Design

Introduction - state of the art

Bryman (2016, p 60) describes a case study as being focused on a single ‘thing’. In our

case the basis of our case study started with being “how and why has parliamentary trust fallen in

Italy?” and as a possible helping question “And how has it effected Italy?”. During our research

we found that this was too wide, and we specified it a lot during our research, so it ended up

being “​How has parliamentary trust been effected in Italy after the financial recession in

2007/08 till 2012”

As can be noticed by our starting point being completely devoid of base assumptions, we

simply see that there is a consensus, on the fact that trust to the parliament was mostly falling in

Italy after the financial crisis. This means that we do not base our project as so many others on a

grand theory, but instead we found minor theories/concepts which are relevant to our research

through or literature review to analyse and understand our specific findings. The problem with

this is; that we can be accused of choosing the theories which supports our hypothesis. As an

answer to this situation, we must say that the review of the literature and concepts in this project,

has been made in alignment with the facts our literature review has uncovered, and based on

general agreement in the literature, and that any choices made based on less than complete

agreement in the literature always are described and critically examined.

One of the first findings from our state of the art was the fact that through a thorough

review, parliamentary trust is not simply falling but there is a small surge in Italy shortly after the

financial crisis. This is interesting because we found that in most countries in the EU this trust

has been falling. We therefore choose to do a short comparison with Italy and countries which

the literature told us should be economically and socially alike, to understand if it was something

that only existed in Italy. This was where we found the Mediterranean social model, and did a

short comparison to see if the surge in parliamentary trust really is an outlier for italy, or it might

6

be something to do with the social model. Since we found that this surge is a special thing for

Italy, and not for the social model, and since we could not find any research that explained this

outlier. This period of time and the surge in parliamentary trust became the focus of our research.

We choose to do an analysis of which factors could be the reason for this surge, all the

factors that the state of the art told us should be able to effects parliamentary trust short term.

Through this analysis we found that there seem to be an inverse relation between parliamentary

trust and perception of corruption. This is the opposite of the direct causal relation our state of

the art had told there should be. Therefore this specific case seemed even more interesting.

We therefore decided to look for a possible intervening variable. If it is expected that the

two should have a direct causal link, what could then shortly reverse the relation. We therefore

started an analysis of specific events in Italy, which has happened around the time of the

inversion of the relation, and we found that there are several events which possibly could explain

the inversion of the relation. We therefore started an analysis of specific events in Italy, which

has happened around the time of the inversion of the relation, and we found that there are several

events which possibly could explain this particular behaviour from in Italy.

This project will analyse the graphs that Diego and Guilem (2016) has made, based on

Eurobarometer data and compare that with different raw data from World Bank and

Transparency International. The first graph in Appendix A shows parliamentary trust in Italy,

Portugal, Spain and Greece. It is relevant to show all four because we have found these four

countries are comparable, since they have the Mediterranean social model (see theory section).

The first part of our analysis, will be an analysis of the parliamentary trust in the four countries

compared with data from the three factors which should influence parliamentary trust in short

term, unemployment, government debt and perception of corruption. We do this to show that

even the countries that are the most like Italy does not have the surge in parliamentary trust right

after the financial crisis, and therefore the surge in Italy must be an outlier.

7

After our first analysis found that the most correlative factor in parliamentary trust in

Italy seems to be perception of corruption, and since we found an inverse relation for several

years instead of the expected correlation, we choose to do an exploratory analysis to find

possible intervening variables which could facilitate this unexpected relation. This exploratory

analysis will start from looking at a timeline made by BBC (7 February 2019) of events in Italy.

The goal of that is to find out if a specific event could have been the cause of the increase in

parliamentary trust, and decrease in perception of corruption right after the 2007/2008 financial

crisis.

Data Collection

There are several factors which should be mentioned about the choices made regarding

the data in our analysis. First the choice of BBC timeline could at first glance seem invalid. Any

analysis is no better than the sources used, and one has to be careful when using sources from

what is basically a media firm, which in spite of its good reputation is not held to academic

objectivity. On the other hand our goal is exactly to understand which stories the Italian people

have been exposed to during this exact period of time. Where better to find that, than from a

broadcasting company itself. Since parliamentary trust is a question of perception, and

perception is shaped by the media, it makes perfect sense to use this source. There will always be

a risk, that the events chosen by the BBC might be the events which effects their readers more

than the average Italian, which could hurt the objectivity of the whole project, but in lack of a

perfect objective source BBC timeline can help show us which events happened at the same time

as the surge in parliamentary trust in Italy, as we deemed British broadcasting corporation to be a

reputable reliable source.

Second the choice of quantitative data point from the World Bank and Transparency

International was more simple. We used the most reputable sources we could find and both have

a track record, and methods that makes them a very solid foundation of research, the most

important data on parliamentary trust has been reviewed as a concept in our theory section.

8

Delimitations and Limitations

It is important for the purpose of this project, to consider the boundaries that we will find

in our research, the different delimitations and limitations.

The first one is that any of the participants of this project either speak or understand Italian,

which means that all the literature and data collected will be from English material only. Here is

a clear limitation because as we have shown, this will be a case study research about Italy, so in

order to go deeper into the best possible way, it seems relevant to have the chance to study the

different materials made by themselves, in their own language. Even if this could have opened

more data and local point of views, working on an English based material is still important and

useful, mainly because there are several Italian and foreign knowledge made in English.

Another one is the limitation of the concept of trust. This is a broad topic analysed in a

broad perspective and research areas, from psychology to political analysis. It is for this reason

that we choose a specific frame of what we will understand for trust, leaving outside other

definitions and approaches to this concept. As we will describe in the theory chapter, the

measurements of trust here will be related with the one used by the Eurobarometer survey, where

they ask themselves to the participants of the survey if they tend to trust or not to the different

institutions. On top of this view point, we choose to use the definition of Van de Meer (2010)

that sees the trust in institutions as something mainly related with the perception of how

competent they see the parliament in this case.

The second delimitation that we can see in this project is that the period of analysis. We

won’t work in a longitudinal view of the behavior of parliamentary trust in Italy, which could

have provided a wider analysis. In a more specific way, we will discuss a short period of their

history, from 2008 to 2012, the years right after the economic crisis. Even if it could have

brought more information to explore a longer period, seems relevant to focus on a particular

period where we found in the literature review, was a different behaviour in Italy than their

neighbours, where they behaved in a similar way between themselves. Those are the other

Southern European countries that shares the Mediterranean social model (Spain, Greece and

9

Portugal) as we choose to consider part of the same system sharing this view point from several

authors that will be shown in the theoretical chapter as well.

A third delimitation is the fact that we use central government debt in our content

analysis. Local government debt can have an equally large effect on parliamentary trust, and this

is not a factor which this project have accounted for.

A fourth delimitation is our choice of GDP number. The reason for our numbers of GDP

fluctuation a lot is not just the economic crisis, but the fact that it is not measured in PPP, which

means the exchange rate from euro to the dollars in which it is measured matters to the result.

10

Theory Chapter

Parliamentary trust

Parliamentary trust will be defined in this project from two different and complementary

authors, where one is attempting to talk about trust in general, and the second one connecting the

concept of trust with institutions like the Parliament, specifically around the concept of

competent​. The first one is made by Kasperson et al. (1992), and the second one byVan der Meer

(2010).

Trust

One definition of trust in relation to this project is the one established by Kasperson et

al’s in 1992. They see the concept of trust as a multidimensional one, which includes: emotional,

cognitive and behaviour dimensions. These areas at the same time, are involved with the

expectations about others, awareness of taking risks and the subjective perceptions of situations.

In addition to what has already been said, this author talks about “Four key dimensions of trust”:

perceptions of commitment, competence, caring, and predictability” (​Kasperson et al.’s, 1992).

Parliamentary trust

In order to find a more precise definition of parliamentary trust specifically, it seems

relevant to quote Van der Meer (2010). These authors recognize the four dimensions of trust

made by Kasperson et al’s (1992) as a relevant definition, but mainly to frame it in the

relationship between persons. In order to talk about trust in national institutions, it needs to be

developed: Parliaments may be judged to be competent when the policy output is successful

socially, economically and/or politically. Which means in the eyes of this author, the main

change is related to the concept of seeing it as a competent institution. In this area, the trust to the

institution may be considered committed when they are supported by a larger share of the

11

electorate. Parliamentary behaviour may be encouraged when citizens are able to dismiss

politicians who do not function well.” (Van der Meer, 2010)

Eurobarometer: Sample and fieldwork data collection

In order to better understand how we are going to use the concept of ​Parliamentary trust,

it is important to talk about the Eurobarometer. In terms of this project, this survey and their data

collection, will be the main guide to make our statements and analysis. In the next part it will be

explained how they collect the data and understand the concept of trust. (Eurobarometer, 2019)

Sampling

In each wave the Eurobarometer Survey starts collecting data, the samples used are

different and independent every time. The design of the sampling as they call it, in all the

countries is a ​multi-stage, random ​(probability) one. First, they make stratification according to

the distribution of the national, resident population. This is done taking in consideration the

metropolitans, urban and rural areas, and proportional to the population size and density. After

this process, the survey uses random selection of this samples, calling them ​primary sampling

units ​(PSU). They have to be selected from each of the administrative regions in the different

countries. (Eurobarometer, 2019)

After this mechanism starts the process of the second stage where a cluster of places

(addresses) are selected from the Primary Sampling Units (PSU) that were randomly chosen to

be part of the sample. This happens in a systematically procedure, which starts with an initial

address selected in a random procedure. In each household a respondent is chosen, again in a

random way which could be for example, the birthday method. The people who are trying to

obtain the information from the respondent, should try to reach him/her in no more than two

opportunities and conduct no more than one interview per household. This could differ in special

target groups or oversamples, for example, with a quota sampling. (Eurobarometer, 2019)

12

Interview

Specifically the moment of collecting data, is made by an interview either in special or

standard topics. For this particular survey, the questions are conducted in a face to face

procedure in the respondents homes using a specific system, the Computer Assisted Personal

Interview (CAPI), which has been used at least from the Eurobarometer 62 in the countries

where this technique was able to be used. (Eurobarometer, 2019)

As the main question in this project is related with the people levels of trust in general but

specifically about the parliament, is relevant to consider which question is made by the

Eurobarometer to collect the data of this specific topic: ​“I would like to ask you a question about

how much trust you have in certain institutions. For each of the following institutions, please tell

me if you ​tend to trust it or tend not to trust it.​”​ ​(Eurobarometer, 2019).

Operationalisation of the concept

After showing how it will be understood in this project the concept of political trust and

where and how the data is collected by the Survey we will use (Eurobarometer), since it is

relevant to see how this particular point of view will effect our statements.

The main idea is that the concept of trust in institutions, and particularly in the parliament, is

related with the idea of how competent it is seen from the citizens. Therefore, it will be

connected with the main factors that seems to effect political trust. According to Diego and

Guilem (2016), political trust in Southern Europe is related with three factors: unemployment

rate, public debt and perception of corruption.

Therefore in this project it will be understood that these factors and what will be shown in

the analysys, will be based on the concept and opinion of how competent (trusted), the

Parliament is seen to be. It is to be expected that research made on a different basis and

definitions will result in different findings. Therefore our choice of concept is important to keep

in mind when one reads our research.

13

Mediterranean Social Model

Mediterranean social model (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain), concentrate their social

spending on old-age pensions and allow for a high segmentation of entitlements and status. Their

social welfare systems generally draw on protecting employment and early retirement provisions

to exempt portions of the working age population from taking part in the labour market. The

wage structure is, at least in the formal sector, covered by collective bargaining and strongly

compressed (​Sapir, André, 2006​).

In southern Europe and Mediterranean countries, there are sometimes mentioned more

countries such as Cyprus and Malta. This paper, however, was mainly inspired by the social

model classification of Sapir, André. (2006) and the paper of Muro and Vidal (2016) which is

concerning trust in institutions of southern European countries in the context of the economic

crisis. Both papers limit the country to Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. The four countries are

also called PIIGS, which includes Ireland when it comes to the countries with severe hit by

Eurozone crisis (Petropoulos, N., & Tsobanoglou, G. O., 2014). Therefore, these countries

appeared in common in a number of studies of southern Europe. (Gunther R, Diamondouros PN,

& Sotiropoulos DA, 2006), (Hadjimichalis, C, 2018), (Rosefielde, S., Kuboniwa, M., &

Mizobata, S., 2013). The search for data concerning other countries was also very limited.

Therefore, the Mediterranean countries or southern European countries mentioned in this paper

are limited to Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain.

First the Mediterranean countries started from similar circumstances. The southern

European countries had similar historical situations when the Southern European social model

was formed. After the influence of Napoleon in the 19th century, each country showed a strong

concentration of power in the center. Italy was worried that the provinces that recently united

would be separated, Spain had control over regionalism arising from left-wing and right-wing

extremism, Greece had a long struggle for independence against the Ottoman Empire and

Portugal had a rivalry between Porto and Lisbon. The emergency situation in the four countries

14

strengthened centralized tendencies, which soon became the backdrop for the emergence of

dictatorships in the 20th century. Entering the 20th century, each country was seen exercising

physical authority, such as police action and martial law, for the benefit of the socioeconomic

elite. As a result, social integration of the poor has failed (Gunther R, Diamondouros PN, &

Sotiropoulos DA, 2006).

On the economic front, the policy was based on interventionism. Government-led

economic development and state-run companies have prevented the market mechanism while

protecting economic elite. In Italy, Spain and Portugal, corporate protectionism prevailed and

formed favorable regulations, labor market conditions (Gunther R, Diamondouros PN, &

Sotiropoulos DA, 2006). The economic crisis of 2007/08 had different levels of consequences

among the EU countries. But seems more relevant to analyse the specific case of Italy, because

of the particular characteristic of this country and their political world, and the recent

development of the parliamentary democracy in the country. (Marangoni and Verzichelli, 2014)

It is not hard to say that the political system in Italy was strongly effected after the

economic crisis. Contrary to the reality of many other countries, the main decisions in Italy about

how to confront the crisis, were made by a non electorally legitimate government. The ones in

position to take the different actions, were the new ‘technocratic’ government, the executive led

by Mario Monti and a broad coalition of parliamentary parties. Therefore is possible to say that

the ‘inclusion’ of the opposition in this new technocratic government is the more remarkable

consequence of the economic crisis in the country. (Marangoni and Verzichelli, 2014).

This new coalition could be seen as a type of government that aims to include and collect

different points of view, but on the contrary, it wasn ́t so much about cooperation. Actually was

more related with the idea of a transitional process which involved the dismantling of the

previous parliamentary model. This turn in the way of ruling the country seems relevant in all the

decisions made by this country to cope with the crisis. This is another reason to analyse how the

crisis effected the country, where the system of parliamentary model changed to a new one full

of uncertainty. (Marangoni and Verzichelli, 2014).

15

As has been said, the economic crisis in Italy changed the way of understanding the

political world, where the italian had finally thought that a long period of unclear and

disorganized politics, had ended. But this switch from the parliamentary model to a more

increasing ‘presidential’ one, resulted as the opposite of clarity and inclusion, even seen as a

more authoritative regime. This consequences, goes actually in a more deep and regular way than

is easy to see, they actually effected the day to day life of italian during this period. (Marangoni

and Verzichelli, 2014)

The Southern European countries showed similar characteristics when it came to

government providing jobs, which was best for middle-class people who were educated but had

no assets. As a result, the post-office system of giving employment to public offices or

institutions was open to the public in return for political sponsorship. This trend did not

disappear in southern Europe and increased even though it was in the 20th century. National

institutions did not have the capacity to satisfy citizens, and political patronage and clientelism

prevailed. Unbalance and instability due to power and manpower biased in certain departments

were also a problem (Gunther R, Diamondouros PN, & Sotiropoulos DA, 2006).

Both Southern European social models had dictatorships until the 20th century and were

not interested in welfare programs such as social security and social insurance compared to

northern or central Europe. Interest in inequality resolution and redistribution began relatively

late. Italy was the fastest democratized of the four countries and was the first to join the

European Community. At this time, already Italy's social security system had developed like a

model in Northern and Western Europe. Spain and Portugal ended their dictatorships 30 years

later and joined the EU, followed by Greece. As a result, they met the preconditions for reducing

government debt, and implemented various social policies under the EU policy (Gunther R,

Diamondouros PN, & Sotiropoulos DA, 2006).

Economic development in southern Europe in the 1980s has the following in common:

The rural areas combined agriculture with small businesses and tourism at the family level to

make progress. In manufacturing, the home country's working population decreased and the

number of immigrants increased. Political patronage and clientelism which was mentioned

16

before still existed, and with disproportionate development among regions, we chose inflation

economic policy. In the '90s, mergers and acquisitions of specific areas of large and foreign

capital followed (Hadjimichalis, C, 2018).

The success of the neo-liberal system and entry into the eurozone has been a major

challenge for less competitive companies that could have survived under government

intervention. The economic situation in southern Europe, which had been unprepared, worsened.

(Hadjimichalis, C, 2018).

In sum, similar historical backgrounds and social situations in the four countries and the

process of economic opening by capitalism and neoliberalism resulted in common structural and

social problems appearing in the following paragraphs.

Common problems for southern European countries are the high unemployment,

women's economic participation below the EU average, low social mobility, persistent or worse

imbalance between regions, and a higher probability of corporate closures. (Rossi, U. 2012) In

this context, countries have experienced two political crises due to the global economic crisis and

government policies. In return for financial aid from Troika, austerity was implemented and the

role of the state in the economy was reduced. The originally high unemployment rate has risen

again, and attempts to maintain the euro's dollar index have adversely effected primary and

secondary industries. That has led to a decline in both economic activity and consumption.

Income inequality, social unrest and weakening of public institutions have made southern

European countries challenged by democratic legitimacy. (Zamora-Kapoor, A, & Collier, X,

2014)

As shown Southern European countries have some common ground to connect with each

other in terms of historical trends and social models ​(​Sapir, André, 2006​), (Gunther R,

Diamondouros PN, & Sotiropoulos DA, 2006), (Hadjimichalis, C, 2018) and are the countries hit

hard by the global economic crisis and the ensuing eurozone debt crisis. (​Petropoulos, N., &

Tsobanoglou, G. O., 2014). In this paper, we try to find out why Italy's trust in parliament among

17

the four countries with these similarities has shown different aspects and what factors have

influence to them.

18

Literature review

This literature review include first a part called state of the art where we will go through

our findings on causal relations of parliamentary trust, and relevant facts about italy. In the

second part called Italian historical review until 2008, we will try to go through the latest most

relevant events and history of italy in relation to parliamentary trust, since nothing happens in a

vacuum, and understanding which historical events goes before, this will be a key to unlocking

an understanding of what happened in the years, which we are trying to understand 2008-2012.

State of the art

Division of power 2008 in Italy

In italy the people vote on 4 different levels: municipal, regional, provincial and national.

These local parliaments has a lot of influence on local laws, and at times also national functions,

such as choice of president. There also exist different degrees of autonomy in the local

governments (Britannica, Last Updated: nov 6, 2019). The italian parliamentary system is in

general very influenced by the US bicameral system. It has a completely proportional system in

the chamber of deputies and a close to proportional system in the senate. It has to be noted that in

the senate the minimum voting age is 25 unlike many european countries and the chamber of

deputies where it is 18 (Britannica, Last Updated: nov 6, 2019). Another feature that the italian

parliament has like the US is standing committees which means that the parliament itself does

not vote on all matters, at times only standing committees votes. This also means that the

government agenda setting power is limited, since the committees has the ability to suggest and

interfere; standing committees could also decrease the accountability of members of parliament

(Britannica, Last Updated:Nov 6, 2019). In general the italian national parliamentary system has

a lot of influence on other branches of government. They choose the president together with

19

regional representatives and they choose a third of the judges of the constitutional court

(Britannica, Last Updated:Nov 6, 2019).

Finally in italy as so many other places the parliament has to approve the budget, but in

italy the parliament does not have the right to know the budget details of many public bodies

giving the executive unchecked decision power on these matters (Britannica, Last Updated:Nov

6, 2019).

Determinants of political and parliamentary trust.

For this paper, we tried to find determinants of political and parliamentary trust. There

are several factors which have an effect on both of trust. There were other factors that were

totally different from the general expectation, and there were conflicting results for each paper.

This chapter will introduce you to the determinants found.

The first factor is corruption. In all its studies, corruption has been found to have a

significant causal relationship with parliamentary trust and political trust (Van der Meer, T.,

2010), (Van der Meer, T., & Hakhverdian, A., 2017), and (Diego Muro & Guillem Vidal 2017).

Van der meer (2010) study found that corruption has a negative and lasting effect on

parliamentary trust, and that people with higher levels of education are more effected by it

because they have greater understanding and awareness of corruption. Subsequent studies also

showed negative effects of corruption as well. (Van der Meer, T., & Hakhverdian, A., 2017). The

paper of Diego Muro & Guillem Vidal (2017) further narrowed the subject of the study and set it

up as four countries in southern Europe, Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain to explore the decisive

factors effecting political trust. In this study, corruption was also judged to have an adverse

effect on political trust. In sum, the effect of corruption is negative for trust and more effective

for the higher educated people.

The following are indicators of the country's economic performance. First, the study by

Van der meer (2010) found that objective economic indicators do not have a significant impact

on confidence in Congress. Rather than objective performance, it is associated with subjective

20

perceptions resulting from the feelings of citizens, such as individual income levels. And in

subsequent studies, macroeconomic performance was uneffected by the well-controlled

circumstances of the above-mentioned elements of corruption, but it was correlated with trust in

Congress to those who had high levels of education enough to recognize economic performance.

(Van der Meer, T., & Hakhverdian, A., 2017). The study of southern Europe yielded slightly

different results, though on large stems it was the same. The macroeconomic indicators of

unemployment and public debt turned out to be important factors in political trust. Real

economic performance is not significant, but rather unemployment and public debt allow citizens

to feel directly what the national economy is like and form subjective perceptions of the

economy. (Diego Muro & Guillem Vidal 2017). Combining the above three studies, all practical

economic achievements do not effect trust in parliament, political confidence, and subjective

perceptions felt in different views and circumstances of each person are more important.

However, in the research of DiPietro, W. (2013), the opposite result came out. Objective

economic performance, especially the standard of living, economic growth and proper spending

of government is important for political trust.

According to Cristina Leston-Bandeira (2012) parliament is at the center of politics, and

citizens can easily observe institutions through advanced information and communication

technologies, and parliament strives to enhance its visibility through tools such as social network

services. Parliament is also a political bridge between citizens and the government and a

mediator. (Cristina Leston-Bandeira, 2012)

As described earlier, the acts of Parliament itself does not necessarily play a decisive role

in confidence in Parliament. Rather, external factors, such as corruption, citizens' subjective

perceptions of economic performance, have greater influence on trust. Given the characteristics

of parliament, which cannot represent every individual's value or interest, it is impossible for

parliament to give any voter a lasting political satisfaction. Finally, the main challenge to address

in the relationship between parliament and citizens is that they feel distanced from parliament.

To enhance the trust in parliament and its citizens, it is important to first establish a relationship

in which citizens can feel no stranger to parliament. (Cristina Leston-Bandeira, 2012)

21

In Italy, constituency services are not considered an important task for parliament.

Members of parliament which are trying to communicate directly through the electronic

communication is the minority. Italian citizens have used petitions and public legislation

policies, but no changes have been made without the political backing of influential figures or

groups. The distance that the general public feels about parliamentary work has not diminished

since the early 90s. In the case of government, its utility is increasing, but parliament has failed

to show a new face. Citizens see parliament as a speculation ground for selfish politicians. Many

politicians in Italy are using public resources for personal gain, being criticized by the media and

focusing on surviving rather than being responsible or acting for reform. The relationship

between Italy's parliament and its citizens is low in trust and very unstable. (Federico Russo &

Luca Verzichelli, 2012)

When it comes to political trust, the role of the media cannot be omitted and there are two

types of online media. Traditional media such as online news articles and social media. In the

former case, it was found to have a positive effect on political trust. The balance is relatively

stable, as they introduce opposition from a positive perspective at the same time, even if negative

reports such as political scandals are reported. But for social media, it is hard to find a positive

message compared to traditional media when delivering negative news, as it contains a lot of

biased information. Thus, distrust continues to continue and, contrary to traditional media, has a

negative impact on political trust. (​Andrea Ceron​, 2015)

After analyzing Italy's content in 2012, Italy has a remarkably high degree of negativity

in social media and delivers content that goes against politics and system. On the other hand,

neutrality is higher than that of social media because traditional media outlets also report the

position of political elite as well as rebuttal on negative issues. These results suggest that online

media and political trust are not causal. but they are likely to effect citizens who get information

from online media. (​Andrea Ceron​, 2015)

Social capital is a very important indicator for how high parliamentary trust is in different

italian regions (Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti 1993). Even though the relation between

parliamentary trust and social capital can is not uniformly agreed to have a causal relation, (Mark

22

Hooghe and Dietlind Stolle, 2003) the correlation is very strong in Italy, very likely because of

its history. In Italy there is a division which is based on the different civic traditions of the south

and the north of Italy. (Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti 1993). These civic traditions have in the

north created strong vertical cooperation, where as it hasn’t in the south. (Putnam, Leonardi and

Nanetti 1993) vertical cooperation through associations and other memberships of groups is the

basis of what social capital is according to most definitions of social capital. (Julia Häuberer

2011) Said in other words social capital is a perfect indicator for how much institutional trust

there will be in a region in italy (Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti 1993).

There are three more factors related with political trust. Perceived judicial independence

and extent of democracy. Independence of Judiciary has positive effect for political trust and

democracy has a negative effect. Growth of democracy make diffusion of power, which ​increase

the chances of the government falling into a deadlock. Therefore, citizens may feel political

insensibility and skepticism because of democracy. And public trust in politicians become lower.

(DiPietro, W., 2013). Finally, the proportional electoral system has a positive effect on trust in

parliament. ​The proportional electoral system reflects the political preferences of more

individuals than disproportional electoral system, enabling the parliament to represent and care

for the positions of various people.​ (Van der Meer, T., 2010).

Italian Historical review until 2008

Parliamentary history

In order to become the Republic of Italy, by the year of 1946, after the decision of a

referendum in favor of a republic by 54 percent of the votes cast, the royal family was forced to

leave the country for supporting Mussolini during the WWII. Many southerners voted for the

monarchy but the centre and north of the country voted for the republic. There was three largest

parties: the Christian Democrats – the most powerful party among the three, Socialists and

Communists. In 1947 the Cold War began to influence the Italian politics. After a visit to the

USA, the Christian Democratic leader, Alcide De Gasperi, returned with $150 million aid and to

ensure that much-needed US continued, he had excluded the communists and their allies, the

23

Socialists from his government. That decision was made after the US Secretary of the State

George Marshall, threatened that the aid would be cancelled if the Communists and Socialists

came to power. In some areas, Communists supporters started to put into practice a plan for

revolution, taking over tram lines and occupying key communication centres. The Christian

Democrats accused the Communists of preparing a ​coup d’état ​over Italian politics. (Britannica,

last updated: nov 6, 2019)

The main effect of the 1948 elections was the division of the trade union movement, into

three competing federations: the “red” (Communists and Socialists), the “white” (Catholic and

Christian Democratic) and the moderate (Italian Labour Union). The Christian Democrats had

the support of the US military and financial sources, and also they had a strong social and

religious base in northern regions counting on an anti-communist sentiment among the

southerners. In the late 1950’s the Socialist Party broke off its alliance with the Communists and

began to cooperate with the Christian Democrats. (Britannica, last updated: nov 6, 2019)

All the major Italian parties had large memberships recruited from organizations such as

Catholic Action, cooperatives, and trade unions. These organizations often provided tangible

benefits, such as jobs, disability pensions, and cheap holidays to their members. Most parties

were groupings of organized factions, each with its own leaders, deputies, ideological base,

sources of finance, and journals. Within each party – particularly the Christian Democratic Party,

these factions contended for power and for control of lucrative firms and agencies in the public

sector to secure financial backing and jobs for supporters. During the postwar, the Christian

Democratic Party remain in power, but after 1953 they lost their absolute majority in parliament,

that made them pursue coalition partners, what led them to bring the Italian Social Movement

into the coalition, but that made them face mass demonstrations, so they decided to give up that

idea (Britannica, last updated: nov 6, 2019).

During the parliament elections, the voters could select the party and particular

candidates from that selected party. The state sector of the economy and the welfare services

were both expanded after the war, and that made party members or sympathizers got themselves

new jobs, also the parties were financed by state firms or particular factions. In many areas of the

country, especially in the south – at that time it was dominated by the Christian Democratic

24

Party, that made the southerners increase their predominance in governments posts. State

employees received generous benefits and some public pensions that allowed the members

retirement after 20 years of service. This provided a huge drain on public finances, it was a

corrupt system called ‘patryocracy’, which built links between organized crime, political

patronage and government contracts. Under that Mafia-Christian Democratic control, parties and

their clients siphoned amounts of money and resources meant to aid victims of natural disasters.

(Britannica, last updated: nov 6, 2019)

The most postwar change was the land reform, and the major economic problem for that

to happen in the whole Italy, was the relatively underdeveloped south of the country with

massive landlords and the State, on behalf of them, intervened to end the reform. That made

millions of young men and women to migrate to the north. Despite that, there was a special

Southern Development Fund which financed roads, schools, electrification, health services,

water provision and industrial development. The fund spent $20 billion between 1950 and 1980,

but it did not industrialize the southern Italy, the unemployment wages were 40 percent below

the national average. (Britannica, last updated: nov 6, 2019)

In the beginning of the 1960’s Italy had its bigger transformation from a largely agrarian

poor country into one of the most economically and socially advanced countries of the world,

due to some social changes, the birth rates fell sharply after 1964, after 1971 contraceptive

methods became available and by the 1990’s the Italians had one of the lowest birth rates of any

industrial country, with families opting to have only one child and adults remaining single

(Britannica, last updated: nov 6, 2019). Most Italians were now urbanites living in apartments

and the girls in general began going to secondary schools in the 1960’s and by the 1970’s there

was a great amount of female graduates. Those facts brought to Italian citizens a new political

point of view, where the Chriatian Democrats parties has no longer the majority votes.

The Italian economy began to develop during the 1980’s in the central and northeastern

part of the country – collectively known at that time as the ‘third Italy’. Family-run firms, and

fashion industries began to replace traditional businesses in the northern cities (Britannica, last

updated: nov 6, 2019). A key political fact during that time was the diversification of the media

25

at the end of the 1970’s which brought to the lens of the media a dynamic entrepreneur, Silvio

Berlusconi.

Due to Corruptions investigations in the early 1990’s several remaining figures of the

Mafia was arrested in the beginning of 1993 by the authorities. In the late 1990’s a new party

called Forza Italia (Go Italy) led by Silvio Berlusconi – one of the richest in the country, who

was in control of a vast media empire, such as three national commercial television channels,

much of the press, and the highly successful A.C. Milan football club; emerged attaching

continuously the most prominent anti-Mafia judge, Giancarlo Casselli. These attacks resulted in

his wrongful dispossession, in 1999 (Della Porta and Andretta, 2013).

The decline of Italy’s major political parties as a result of corruption scandals of the early

1990’s created a political vacuum, where the citizens had lost their faith in the politicians, and by

1994, the media entrepreneur Berlusconi, came with a political campaign backgrounded by a

populist message of anti-communism. He got the attention of the great public after joining a

federation, called “Northern League”, which had developed in 1992 securing almost 20 percent

of the northern vote in the parliamentary elections.

When Silvio Berlusconi became prime minister, in March 1994 he promised to cut taxes,

low the public spending, decentralize government, and generate a million new jobs. In July 1994

he was in the center of anti-corruption investigations, consequently, in December 1994 the

Northern League ended its alliance with Berlusconi, that was when his government fell. He went

back into the 1996 elections supported by some Catholic parties, at that time the Northern

League was starting to lose ground, once it has not the media power of Berlusconi. Since then

the country has had only weakened centre-left governments; by the end of 1998 until 2000

Massimo D’alema, leader of the Democrats of the Left was the Italian prime minister, when

Giuliano Amato assumed but also fell in 2001. Is important to mention that during those

happenings, a new law regulated television time for all parties, while Berlusconi was the

opposition leader with his centre-right coalition - even though he has a huge media advantage,

that led him back into power beginning prime minister for the second and longest time in recent

history, from 2001 to 2006. He was replaced in the elections of 2006 by Romano Prodi - leader

of the centre-left coalition, but he resigned due to a loose of a vote of confidence in the Senate in

26

2008. During the national elections, in the same year, Berlusconi came up again with a new party

named People of Freedom and settled his third term as prime minister (Britannica, last updated:

nov 6, 2019).

Economic Crisis

In the early stages of the Lehman Brothers crisis and the financial crisis, Italy suffered

little. Italian institutions had relatively small holdings of subprime bonds. But like banks in other

countries, they have joined in increasing liquidity and limiting credit. In fact, the factor that led

to the Italian bank's risk was the creation of an alliance network connecting with Central and

Eastern European countries. There was a good chance that it would collapse. Unicredit, which is

the biggest financial group and bank in Italy, avoided a crisis thanks to government support,

while smaller banks limited credit and raised their collateral Small and medium-sized enterprises

have become more difficult to survive, and people's consumption has also decreased. In the end,

small and medium enterprises resulted in a reduction in profits and costs and a reduction in

full-time employment, with large corporations taking action to internalize processes or

renegotiate prices. In the case of the government, the fiscal deficit was averted due to a drop in

tax revenues and a response to the financial crisis, and public debt increased by a large margin

(Quirico 2010).

In Italy, the 2008 economic crisis did not have a huge impact on finance compared to

other southern European countries. Italy's banks were less developed and less sophisticated, so

they did not deal well with high-risk products such as derivatives. Also, the regulations and

supervision of the authorities were relatively stricter. The effects of the crisis were not direct for

these two reasons. Italy's economy, however, tended to rely on exports and was indirectly

adversely effected by the global economy's downturn. It was a serious, even if not direct, blow to

Italy, which has suffered from low growth and has been hard to take active measures due to high

levels of government debt. (Quaglia, L, 2009)

In the secondary aftermath of the global economic crisis, a debt crisis has arrived in

southern Europe. These countries, in turn, were rescued and their economies were placed under

27

direct EU scrutiny. Greece, which had been the greatest hit, collapsed first, followed by Portugal,

which was the third country to be bailed out. Spain, which seemed unlikely before, also broke its

bubble and borrowed 100 billion euros from ESM. But things were quite different in Italy, they

have always been a country with a lot of public debt and good management of it. ​This experience

helped Italy cope with the crisis. The less developed banking system which was mentioned also

allowed Italy to be in a better position than other southern European countries. (Morlino, L &

Sotilotta, C, 2019)

Corruption

As found in the state of the art, corruption undermines trust in political institutions such

as the parliament (Francesco Merloni 2019 p 1), (​Donatella Della Porta & Alberto Vannucci

2007). This project will then map corruption in Italy before the analysis, so that the analysis can

be funded on the facts at hand.

Italy has seen a bigger increase in corruption than other developed countries (​Donatella

Della Porta & Alberto Vannucci 2007). To start understanding the situation in italy in 2008, a

good place to start is in the 1990s where two investigation took place. The investigation called

‘clean hands’ and an event called ‘the revolution of the judges. Here the judges made an inquire

into corruption, and seven ministers of Amato’s government had to resign in 1992 when they

came under investigation (​Donatella Della Porta & Alberto Vannucci 2007). The basis of this

was the very independent judiciary in Italy at the time, which against expectations started an

enquiry into corruption and ended up imprisoning corrupt politicians. Despite the fact that

several incidences of corrupt judges can be found in the same time frame. The judges functioned

as a curbing factor to the high political corruption at the time (Donatella Della Porta 2001). The

incidence also showed a strong will against corruption in the Italian citizens. The citizens

supported the ‘revolution of the judges’ against the corrupt politicians (​Donatella Della Porta &

Alberto Vannucci​ 2007).

28

In the follow up to the investigations, the parliament made progress towards a less

corrupt Italy through several law changes made by the parliament. For example the parliament

changed a constitutional articles on immunity from prosecution for members of parliament.

(​Donatella Della Porta​ &​ Alberto Vannucci​ 2007)

The first berlusconi government was from january 1994, shortly after berlusconi first

announced himself in politics. Berlusconi himself came under investigation only months after in

1994 when prosecuting judges became aware that the financial police in Lombardia had taken

bribes from companies, among them som owned by Berlusconi. Berlusconi ended his first term

shortly after. starting it when the northern league withdrew its support for the government in

december 1994. (​Donatella Della Porta​ &​ Alberto Vannucci​ 2007)

The investigations of the 90s where not entirely successful. Several needed reforms never

came through, and others where later blocked by the Berlusconi government from 2001-2006.

The Berlusconi government for example chose to limit the independence of the judges, which

not many years ago had helped lead inquiries into corruption. In fact the Berlusconi government

lead several reforms which where denounced by experts and judges, for undoing the work that

had been started in the 1990s toward a less corrupt country. Under the Berlusconi government

corruption in italy kept steady at a high rate, as supported by numbers on perception of

corruption from transparency international. The corruption rate might even have increased

caused by the lack of effective political solutions, and as denunciations of corruption fell after

the 1990, corruption went back to be profitable and relatively safe. One could even say that the

“fight” between the political class and the judiciary on corruption, was lost by the judges, which

in the Berlusconi years lost more of their independence, and did not reach any goals of non

corruption, they set out to achieve in 1990. In fact the Berlusconi government systematically

loosened corruption laws, and made sure that the still existing charges and investigations into

berlusconi where either outside the new shorter statue of constraint, or simply made non illegal

anymore through amongst other things legalizing unexplainable money kept overseas. (​Donatella

Della Porta​ &​ Alberto Vannucci​ 2007)

29

Analysis

According to our literature review we have found that unemployment, government debt,

and perception of corruption in the public sector are the three most important things effecting

parliamentary trust in the short term. We expect all four to be positively correlated meaning that

if any of the factors gets “worse”, so should parliamentary trust. We will therefore do a content

analysis to see if any one of these factors could be the reason for the surge in parliamentary trust.

You can see the different important factors in Appendices A-C.

Content Analysis

This analysis tries to determine the relation between parliamentary trust in Italy (seen in

appendix A), and all the factors which according to Diego and Guilem (2016) should have an

effect on parliamentary trust in countries from the southern european countries with

Mediterranean social model detailed in our theory chapter. As have been discovered in our

literature review, Diego and Guilem (2016) finds that there is a relation between parliamentary

trust and unemployment (Appendix B), government debt (Appendix C) and perception of

corruption (Appendix D). The literature review has also found that there seems to be a surge in

parliamentary trust in italy right after the economic crisis. This analysis will first try to see if this

surge can be seen in any of the other Mediterranean social model countries, and after that we will

see if any of the aforementioned factors could be of help to explain this surge in parliamentary

trust.

Starting by taking a look at Appendix A. This shows us parliamentary trust based on

Eurobarometer data in the Mediterranean social model countries. In this Appendix it is visible

that that Italy has a short surge in parliamentary trust right after the economic crisis in 2007/2008

unlike any of the other countries from the Mediterranean social model. After 2012 the graph of

parliamentary trust in Italy starts to look more like the other Mediterranean social model

countries. This means that the surge in parliamentary trust is an outlier in this group of countries.

We must therefore expect that the surge is caused by a factor that only effects Italy, since it is

30

only italy that has this surge. The fact that it is a relatively short time the surge is apparent, we

must also expect that it is a factor that can effects parliamentary trust in short term.

Since Diego and Guilems (2016) factors are short-term effect, maybe we can find the

explanation between one of those.

First we start by looking at Unemployment in Appendix B. Here it is visible that at no

time before 2014 is there a positive development in unemployment rate in Italy. This means that

the unemployment gives us no reason to believe it could be the reason for any increase in

parliamentary trust.

Looking at the next factor, government debt in Appendix C, the blue graph shows that the

government debt climbs uninterruptedly with irregularities from 2007-2019. The black graph

show that the Italian GDP climbs rapidly until 2009 and then it goes up and down but on a

downward trajectory until 2016, when it seems to become more steady and build upwards. These

two factors are interesting to analyse together because the central government debt number in

itself isn't enough to understand. The debt has to be put in relation to the GDP or other economic

indicators. In this analysis gdp is used.

The rapid increase in gdp in 2008 and 2009 does correlate with the surge of

parliamentary trust, which means it is possible that it could be a relevant factor on parliamentary

trust. The fact that according to DiPietro, W. (2013) economic performance is detrimental to all

types of political trust, parliamentary trust being a type of political trust and also underbuilds this

idea. On the other hand GDP does not seem to have a very direct relation with parliamentary

trust in the other years (2010-2019) when gdp is going up and down on a downward trajectory.

At least the GDP by itself cannot be an explanation, but the correlation in 2008+2009 could be

relevant.

Regarding central government debt the blue graph shows us an almost constant increase

only with small irregularities. It is also very obvious that when compared to GDP the central

government debt is rising most of the time, but not in the last couple of years. We expect

according to Diego and Guliem (2016) that an increase in government debt should decrease

parliamentary trust. Such a steady decrease cannot be found in the parliamentary trust, but

31

parliamentary trust is found to be mostly decreasing throughout until the last couple of years

where it slightly increases just like the relation between gdp and government debt. The one factor

the central government debt does not seem to correlate with is the short surge in Italy in

2008-2009.

In Appendix D, we can see that from 2007 the perception of corruption decreased very

rapidly. It goes from 52 in 2007 to 48 in 2008 and 39 in 2010. This seems to coincide with an

increase in parliamentary trust. The increase in parliamentary trust happens at the same time as

the decrease in perception of corruption in the public sector. This inverse relation continues as

the amount of parliamentary trust flatlines from 2009 to 2010 and then starts to decrease rapidly

again in 2011. In 2011 the amount of corruption perception increases again, just as the

parliamentary trust decreases. This is the findings our state of the art expects us to find,

according to Diego and Guilem (2016). It is also underbuild by Van der meer (2010) who found

that perception is what matters to parliamentary trust.

What we have found in this analysis is therefore that parliamentary trust in italy has an

unexpected surge in 2008-2009, followed by a plato in 2009-2011 where after it continuously

goes downward, until the latest couple of years.

This analysis then continued to see if any of the factors which according to Guliem and Diego

(2016) should be the ones that effect parliamentary trust short term, since we wanted central

government debt to be in relation to GDP, we choose to also analyse gdp in itself and in relation

to central government debt.

This analysis found that there is not a strict correlation between parliamentary trust in italy and

unemployment. It found that there does seem to be a bit of a correlation with central government

debt, and that the two best explanations for the surge in parliamentary trust is gdp growth and

reduced perception of corruption.

Since our only conclusion so far is that there is a correlation, and that correlations can be caused

by simple coincidence or intervening variables. Our goal will be to explain these correlations.

32

We hope to find an explanation, and from that come to a more specific conclusion to what causes

these two correlations.

Document Analysis

In this second part of our analysis we will now try to find which event happened in

2008-2012 which could have caused the swing in parliamentary trust, and which might have

been related to the swing in perception of corruption. We will here need to be more exact with

our the dates of the surveys since it matters which month our data is from when comparing with

single events. See chart underneath.

Survey Period Sep

2007

Mar – May

2008

Jan – Feb

2009

Sep

2009

May

2010

Tend to trust (%) 25% 16% 30% 27% 26%

Nov - Dec

2010

May

2011

Nov

2011

May

2012

Nov

2012

May

2013

Nov

2013

26% 26% 14% 8% 11% 12% 10%

(Standard Eurobarometer Report 68 - 80, Publication 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and

2013)

Since the increase in parliamentary trust happens somewhere between marts 2008 and

february 2009, we expect the event that might have caused it to happen sometime in 2008.

According to BBC timeline (7 February 2019) there where 3 big events in the year 2008 in italy.

The three events in the BBC timeline could primae facie all be relevant to effect both perception

of corruption and parliamentary trust in Italy. The three events are a no confidence vote in Prodi,

New parliamentary election, and the fact that italy is officially declared to be in recession. We

will now look at all of these events separately to see if they could be the cause of the changes.

33

No Confidence Vote (Corruption)

The first event is a no confidence vote in prime minister Prodis government in January

2008 by the parliament (BBC 7 February 2019). Justice Minister Mastella and his wife, who had

adhered to Catholic values, resigned over several corruption scandals and, therefore, the Prodi

Cabinet was unable to maintain its majority. A no-confidence vote was conducted, resulting in

the resignation of the Cabinet. In this situation, it failed to persuade Berlusconi and to form an

interim government. The resignation of the Cabinet led to the dissolution of parliament. (Rinaldo

Vignati and Gregory Bull, 2009). As mentioned in the previous chapter, the perception of

corruption undermines citizens' trust in the parliament, coupled with corruption scandals and a

seriously unstable Cabinet and the parliament, would have greatly reduced citizens' confidence in

parliament. Since this event happens right before the low measurement of parliamentary trust in

2008, it could very well be the reason for the low measurement.

New parliamentary election

The second event is a new parliamentary election, and the fact that Berlusconi secures a

third term in office as prime minister (BBC 7 February 2019). With the dissolution of

parliament, early general elections were decided in April of that year. As a result, the majority in

the Senate were occupied by the center-right, and local elections were no different. (Rinaldo

Vignati and Gregory Bull, 2009). It may have been the result of disappointment with the

previous left-wing regime and expectations for solving the economic crisis. But the election itself

seems to have had no significant impact, considering that the level of trust in the parliament was

very low even after the election.

Italy declared to be in Recession

Economic indicators are crucial to citizens' political trust. The economic crisis, such as

the 2008 financial crisis, effected the country's use of policies such as economic performance

indicators and austerity measures, which soon led to a fall in people's confidence. The extent of

its impact varies, but the financial crisis has negatively effected the political trust of citizens of

34

each country, and this has become more apparent in the case of countries hit hard. (Veronica

Fagerland Kroknes, Tor Georg Jakobsen & Lisa-Marie Grønning, 2015). For economic

indicators, citizens change their level of trust through comparison with the nation's past

performance, rather than applying objective and absolute criteria to reflect them in parliament

trust (Van Erkel, P.F. and Van Der Meer, T.W., 2016).

Therefore, Italy declared a recession of economy, but the economic indicators were not

as much effected as before, so the declaration of recession most likely did not have a significant

effect on parliamentary trust, and any it would have had, was most likely negative..

A new Government - Berlusconi

According to our walkthrough of events from BBC in 2008, they themselves does not

seem to lend a sufficient answer to why the parliamentary trust has been changed. Yet one thing

that havent been sufficiently studied is the change in parliament/government. A new parliament

can of course have a different relationship with the citizens, so understanding the new parliament

and government is the next step in our analysis, for trying to find a sufficient answer.

As we have shown before there is a tremendous change of parliamentary trust levels in

Italy from the survey made in 2008 to the one in 2009 (See table). And in the same way as the

previous factors, the new government and parliament takes their seats in between those surveys,

therefore, we will analyse the new parliament and government in order to check if it could be a

feasible explanation of this particular surge. The most interesting findings revolve around the

relationship between the government leader, Berlusconi, and his strong propaganda machine.

In April of 2008 Silvio Berlusconi managed to get elected for the third time and a new

parliament was established. In this year, there were only five parties in the parliament, which

respond to the idea of fighting against the usual fragmentation of the political parties system.

(Pasquino, 2008). After this parliamentary election the italian party system shows the least

fragmented one among the other european countries, what could lead to shape the picture of new

stable system (Fabbrini, 2009). Only four groups are part of the senate and five in the deputies

chamera after April of 2008. It is a different behaviour among the other european countries like

35

Spain where they had nine parties groups in the ‘congreso de los diputados’ and six in the

‘senado’. Therefore it is possible to say that fragmentation was strongly reduced in this election

in italy, and two main parties agroupations worked on their own; centre left and centre right, with

no more cooperation with smaller parties (Fabbrini, 2009). This less fragmented parliament

could therefore be a reason for increase in parliamentary trust.

Beside this fact, most of the political decisions in the country at this time depended on the

willing and actions of the two major leaders, and the charismatic “new” prime minister, Silvio

Berlusconi. (Pasquino, 2008)

In order to talk about the possible relationship between the charismatic Silvio Berlusconi

and the surge of political trust during his period in power, he will be analysed. The first aspect

we found, is that he is the richest person in Italy and with that power he controlled a large part of

the mass media industry. He used his media influence to pursue his own interests, for example

create a general public fear of crime. (Ragnedda and Muschert, 2010)

This anomaly is particular to Italy in the shape of almost a monopoly controlled mass

media compared with any other liberal and democratic society. So in Italy the richest person,

Silvio Berlusconi either in a direct or indirect way controlled ninety percent of italian national

produced television, two newspapers and some news-magazines. On top of this, he owned at that

time the copyright of twenty five percent of italian’s books, the main distribution for the majority

of italian’s magazines and movies; and sixty percent of television advertising. (Ragnedda and

Muschert, 2010). This clear control of the majority mass media and creation of content, gives

berlusconi immense power of perception. It is obvious that the media can effect perception, and

therefore he who controls the media also has it within his grasp to control perception which as

explained is a key ingredient in understanding parliamentary trust. This is supported by the fact

that tv news in Italy and I particularity the ones he owned, almost didn't cover the economic

crisis during his time as prime minister. ​(Marangoni and Verzichelli, 2014) this would have

given the italian public a more positive perception of the economy, which then again gives more

parliamentary trust in the period he is in power.

36

This statement could be supported not just with the element of the centralization level in

media control, in addition to it, Berlusconi also had several economic operations in different

sectors like insurance industry, banks, sports and construction (Ragnedda and Muschert, 2010).

Actually Italy shared the lowest levels of press freedom in Europe with Turkey. This fact is

corroborated by the organization of reporters without borders, who ranked Italy into the worst

western country levels of press-freedom. (Freedom house, 2009)

37

Conclusion

“How has parliamentary trust been effected in Italy after the financial recession in

2007/08 till 2012?”

Our findings suggest that there are several factors which are related to parliamentary

trust. Generally the trust in political institutions, and specifically parliament tend to be

determined by the perception of the citizens, (Van der Meer, T., 2010) and (Van der Meer, T., &

Hakhverdian, A., 2017), especially corruption (Van der Meer, T., 2010), (Van der Meer, T., &

Hakhverdian, A., 2017), and (Diego Muro & Guillem Vidal 2017) and the economic wellbeing

of the country (Diego Muro & Guillem Vidal 2017), (DiPietro, W., 2013) are factors that in the

short term effects parliamentary trust in a given country. Other factors that has an effect on

parliamentary trust is independence of the judiciary (DiPietro, W., 2013) and extent of

democracy (DiPietro, W., 2013). These two factors we did not look further into since they are

not likely to be the factors that has changed the parliamentary trust in the short span of time

where we looked at. Inside this field there are still discussions about the specific relations

between parliamentary trust and other indicators, which is something more research could help

clarify, yet it might very well be depend on the specific circumstances of the country which

factors decide parliamentary trust.

Our content analysis showed us that unemployment and central government debt did not

correlate in the years 2008-2012 but that it very likely had a negative impact on parliamentary

trust since it was growing steadily in all those years and are indicators of a bad economy. The

central government debt is also in general compared to gdp more often than it is not, but since

the GDP is fluctuating because of the changing exchange rate, every year changes might not be

too relevant.

The most interesting finding in our content analysis was that perception of corruption is

the factor that is the most correlated with parliamentary trust in Italy. That means, that extent of

perception of corruption is most likely to be the cause of Italy's surge in parliamentary trust. Yet

38

it did not explain why or under which circumstances. That is why we continued to make an

exploratory document analysis to find which events could expand our knowledge.

The exploratory analysis we found three events which could have started the surge in

parliamentary trust in 2008. Those three was and a no confidence vote in prime minister Prodis

government, Italy declared to be in recession and a new election. None of these factors in

themselves seemed to be sufficient explanation to the surge. A no confidence vote could of

course create a bigger trust in the parliament, but it is more likely that since it is a crisis in the

parliament, it would create less trust to the parliament, since they do not themselves have control

of the country and for months italy did not have a government. To be declared to be in recession

could not possibly do anything else but give a bad perception of economic situation in the

country which as explained effects parliamentary trust negatively. Lastly elections can give a

boost, since you replace former parliamentarians to once people more recently have chosen, but

the other Mediterranean countries also have had elections in the period, and they did not

experience any significant surges in parliamentary trust caused by that.

During a further study of event we found that the increase in parliamentary trust seems to

fit with the exact time this new government was in power since the surge ends in 2011 when the

government has to step down, which made us dig further and find two very relevant

events/reasons for the increase in parliamentary trust in 2008-2009. The parliament becomes less

fractured which could give it a more confident and less divided look, and therefore make the

citizens more confident in it. The second, and maybe more important, being that. Berlusconi is

not just any prime minister but a man that owns half of italy's media firms, through which he has

had the ability to shape the perception of amongst other things economic performance of the

country, and perception of corruption, which then gives increase in parliamentary trust. This is of

course a research topic that should be further explored to make a complete conclusion on the

topic. All we can surely conclude, is that there are a lot of “coincidences” pointing towards, that

the most important factor in parliamentary trust in 2008-2012, is Berlusconi controlling people's

perception through his control of the italian media.

39

Bibliography

"Book Reviews." ​European Societies​ 5, no. 3 (2003): 327-45. doi:10.1080/1461669032000111333.

Delhey, Jan, and Kenneth Newton. "Who Trusts?: The Origins of Social Trust in Seven Societies."

European Societies​ 5, no. 2 (2003): 93-137. doi:10.1080/1461669032000072256.

Erkel, Patrick F.a. Van, and Tom W.g. Van Der Meer. "Macroeconomic Performance, Political Trust and

the Great Recession: A Multilevel Analysis of the Effects of Within-country Fluctuations in

Macroeconomic Performance on Political Trust in 15 EU Countries, 1999-2011." ​European

Journal of Political Research​ 55, no. 1 (2015): 177-97. doi:10.1111/1475-6765.12115.

"Europe | Italian Justice Minister Resigns." BBC News. January 16, 2008.

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7191413.stm.

Favretto, Ilaria. "Italy from Crisis to Crisis. Political Economy, Security and Society in the 21st Century."

Journal of Modern Italian Studies​ 24, no. 1 (2019): 200-02. doi:10.1080/1354571x.2019.1550883.

"Freedom of the Press 2009." Freedom House. September 12, 2013.

https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/freedom-press-2009.

"GESIS - Leibniz-Institut Für Sozialwissenschaften." Eurobarometer: Sampling and Fieldwork.

https://www.gesis.org/eurobarometer-data-service/survey-series/standard-special-eb/sampling-and fieldwork.

Gunther, Richard, P. Nikiforos. Diamandouros, and Dimitri A. Sotiropoulos. ​Democracy and the State in

the New Southern Europe​. Oxford University Press, 2006.

HADJIMICHALIS, COSTIS. ​CRISIS SPACES: Structures, Struggles and Solidarity in Southern Europe​.

ROUTLEDGE, 2019.

Holmberg, Soren, Staffan Lindberg, and Richard Svensson. "Trust in Parliament." ​Journal of Public

Affairs​ 17, no. 1-2 (2017). doi:10.1002/pa.1647.

40

Holmberg, Soren, Staffan Lindberg, and Richard Svensson. "Trust in Parliament." ​Journal of Public

Affairs​ 17, no. 1-2 (2017). doi:10.1002/pa.1647.

Hooghe, Marc, and Dietlind Stolle. ​Generating Social Capital: Civil Society and Institutions in

Comparative Perspective​. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

Hooghe, Marc, and Dietlind Stolle. "Introduction: Generating Social Capital." ​Generating Social Capital​,

2003, 1-18. doi:10.1057/9781403979544_1.

Häuberer, Julia. "Introducing the Civic Perspective on Social Capital – Robert D. Putnam’s Concept of

Social Capital." ​Social Capital Theory​, 2011, 53-86. doi:10.1007/978-3-531-92646-9_3.

"Italian Politics in an Era of Recession: The End of Bipolarism?" Taylor & Francis.

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13608746.2018.1436493?src=recsys.

"Italy General Government Debt." Italy General Government Debt | 2019 | Data | Chart | Calendar |

Forecast. https://tradingeconomics.com/italy/government-debt.

"Italy Joins China's New Silk Road Project." BBC News. March 23, 2019.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-47679760.

"Italy Joins China's New Silk Road Project." BBC News. March 23, 2019.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-47679760.

Kasperson, Roger E., Dominic Golding, and Seth Tuler. "Social Distrust as a Factor in Siting Hazardous

Facilities and Communicating Risks." ​Journal of Social Issues​ 48, no. 4 (1992): 161-87.

doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1992.tb01950.x.

Kroknes, Veronica Fagerland, Tor Georg Jakobsen, and Lisa-Marie Grønning. "Economic Performance

and Political Trust: The Impact of the Financial Crisis on European Citizens." ​European Societies

17, no. 5 (2015): 700-23. doi:10.1080/14616696.2015.1124902.

Marangoni, Francesco, and Luca Verzichelli. "From a Technocratic Solution to a Fragile Grand Coalition:

The Impact of the Economic Crisis on Parliamentary Government in Italy."

41

Government-Opposition in Southern European Countries during the Economic Crisis​, 2017,

35-53. doi:10.4324/9781315683829-3.

Meer, Tom Van Der, and Armen Hakhverdian. "Political Trust as the Evaluation of Process and

Performance: A Cross-National Study of 42 European Countries." ​Political Studies​ 65, no. 1

(2016): 81-102. doi:10.1177/0032321715607514.

Merler, Silvia, and Bruegel. "How Do Europeans Feel about the EU?" World Economic Forum.

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/06/how-do-europeans-feel-about-the-eu/.

Montesquieu, Charles De Secondat. ​Du Principe De La Democratie: Extraits De L'esprit Des Lois​.

Librairie De Médicis, 1948.

Morlino, Leonardo, and Cecilia Emma Sottilotta. "Southern Europe and the Eurozone Crisis Negotiations:

Preference Formation and Contested Issues." ​South European Society and Politics​ 24, no. 1 (2019):

1-28. doi:10.1080/13608746.2019.1603697.

Muro, Diego, and Guillem Vidal. "Political Mistrust in Southern Europe since the Great Recession."

Mediterranean Politics​ 22, no. 2 (2016): 197-217. doi:10.1080/13629395.2016.1168962.

Muro, Diego, and Guillem Vidal. "Political Mistrust in Southern Europe since the Great Recession."

Mediterranean Politics​ 22, no. 2 (2016): 197-217. doi:10.1080/13629395.2016.1168962.

Papacostas, Antonis. "Eurobarometer 67.2: European Union Enlargement, Personal Data Privacy, the

National Economy, and Scientific Research, April-May 2007." ​ICPSR Data Holdings​, 2007.

doi:10.3886/icpsr21160.

Pasquino, Gianfranco. "The 2008 Italian National Elections: Berlusconi's Third Victory." ​South European

Society and Politics​ 13, no. 3 (2008): 345-62. doi:10.1080/13608740802349241.

"Political Economy of EMU. Rebuilding Systemic Trust in the Euro Area in Times of Crisis." European

Commission - European Commission. August 01, 2018.

https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/economy-finance/political-economy-emu-rebuilding-systemi

42

c-trust-euro-area-times-crisis_en.

Putnam, Robert D., Robert Leonardi, and Raffaella Y. Nanetti. "Making Democracy Work." 1994.

doi:10.1515/9781400820740.

Putnam, Robert D., Robert Leonardi, and Raffaella Nanetti. ​Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions

in Modern Italy​. Princeton Univ. Press, 1993.

Robson, Colin. ​Real World Research: A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioner-researchers​.

Braille Jymico, 2005.

Rosefielde, Steven, Masaaki Kuboniwa, and Satoshi Mizobata. "Prevention and Crisis Management."

2011. doi:10.1142/8299.

Rossi, Ugo. "There’s No Hope : The Global Economic Crisis and the Politics of Resistance in Southern

Europe1." ​Belgeo​, no. 1-2 (2012). doi:10.4000/belgeo.7071.

Sapir, Andre. "Globalization and the Reform of European Social Models*." ​JCMS: Journal of Common

Market Studies​ 44, no. 2 (2006): 369-90. doi:10.1111/j.1468-5965.2006.00627.x.

"Trust in Parliament." OECD Insights Blog. February 01, 2018.

http://oecdinsights.org/2018/02/01/trust-in-parliament/.

"Trust in Parliament." OECD Insights Blog. February 01, 2018.

http://oecdinsights.org/2018/02/01/trust-in-parliament/.

"Trust in Parliament." OECD Insights Blog. February 01, 2018.

http://oecdinsights.org/2018/02/01/trust-in-parliament/.

"Unemployment, Total (% of Total Labor Force) (modeled ILO Estimate) - Spain, Greece, Italy,

Portugal." Data.

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS?end=2015&locations=ES-GR-IT-PT&star

t=2005.

Vignati, Rinaldo. "Chronology of Italian Political Events, 2008." ​Italian Politics​ 24, no. 1 (2009): 1-40.

43

doi:10.3167/ip.2008.240102.

Zamora-Kapoor, Anna, and Xavier Coller. "The Effects of the Crisis." ​American Behavioral Scientist​ 58,

no. 12 (2014): 1511-516. doi:10.1177/0002764214530649.

E.V., Transparency International. "Overview." Research - CPI - Overview.

https://www.transparency.org/research/cpi/overview.

E.V., Transparency International. "Overview." Research - CPI - Overview.

https://www.transparency.org/research/cpi/overview.

E.V., Transparency International. "Overview." Research - CPI - Overview.

https://www.transparency.org/research/cpi/overview.

Di Quirico, Roberto. "Italy and the global economic crisis." ​Bulletin of Italian Politics​ 2.2 (2010): 3-19.

Della Porta, Donatella, Herbert Reiter, and the collaboration of Massimiliano Andretta, Stefania Milan,

and Federico Rossi". "Desperately seeking politics: political attitudes of participants in three

demonstrations for worker's rights in Italy." ​Mobiliza​tion: An international quarterly​ 17.3 (2012):

349-361

Baron de Montesquieu: 1948 ​The Spirit of the Laws

Massio Ragnedda and Glenn Muschert: “The political use of fear and news reporting in Italy: The case of

berlusconi’s media control” (2010)

Sergio Fabbrini: “The transformation of italian democracy” (2009)

44