The economic foundations of democratic legitimacy: Exploring the

relationship of macroeconomic inequality and trust in democratic

institutions in Europe

C. Giustozzi a*, M. Ganglb and S. Bienstmanc

abcDepartment of sociology, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Carlotta Giustozzi: giustozzi@soz.uni-frankfurt.de *corresponding author

Acknowledgements:

We gratefully acknowledge the opportunity to discuss this work in the Politics and Society

Workshop Series 2022. This study is part of the research project POLAR: Polarization and its

discontents: does rising economic inequality undermine the foundations of liberal societies?

that has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European

Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 833196).

1

The economic foundations of democratic legitimacy: Exploring the

relationship of macroeconomic inequality and trust in democratic

institutions in Europe

We use survey data from the European Social Survey to explore the implications

of changing macroeconomic inequality for citizen’s trust in the main institution

of democratic governance. We extend existing research on the role of economic

inequality by examining an expansive set of indicators to capture increasing

economic polarisation and we employ hybrid multilevel regression models to

distinguish genuinely sociotropic effects of changing macroeconomic inequality

from egocentric effects of citizens’ personal socio-economic status. We

empirically confirm the influence of macroeconomic fundamentals, and find that

after controlling for material prosperity and unemployment rates, the inequality

of market incomes is the primary factor to create repercussions at the level of the

basic democratic order of societies. Many other dimensions of economic

inequality, from the degree of public redistribution to rising poverty levels and

rising top income shares, may all constitute relevant policy issues and may relate

to shifting party systems as well as shifting voter allegiances, but do not

eventually call democratic fundamentals into question. Our analyses thus

vindicate conjunctions from the modern classics of political sociology that have

been seeing societal prosperity among the necessary conditions for sustaining

democratic governance.

Keywords: political trust; macroeconomic conditions; economic inequality;

unemployment; prosperity; hybrid multilevel model

2

Introduction

Democracy undeniably rests on principles and centuries of political philosophy, but also

turns out to be an often shockingly materialist affair in practice. Economic conflict

looms large among the bread-and-butter issues of day-to-day politics at every level of

government, and the left-right dimension defined over economic preferences has long

been considered as the backbone of traditional party systems prior to the emergence of

Green parties after the 1980s, and the more recent surge of nativist right-wing populism

after the 1990s and 2000s (Inglehart & Norris, 2017) . Likewise, economic voting is a

well-documented feature of citizens’ political behaviour (Anderson, 2007; Lewis-Beck

& Stegmaier, 2000). It has often also been documented that economic considerations

and performance affect even the most basic democratic orientations like citizens’ sense

of democratic legitimacy, their trust in the institutions of democratic governance, or

their overall satisfaction with the democratic order of society (see for example Kumlin

et al., 2018; Van Der Meer, 2018).

Yet while there are probably few social scientists to disagree with these

generalities, matters seem far less settled, the available evidence far from consistent,

and the devil to be in the details once the relevant research is examined more

concretely. In van der Meer’s recent survey of the literature, one actually finds the

revealing statements that

“[s]ome studies found significant effects of at least some objective macroeconomic

performance …; others found none …, or even see evidence for inverse effects …”

(2018: 600, emphasis added) and that “consistent evidence does not seem to exist

when we shift our focus … to objective [macroeconomic] outcomes as

determinants of political trust. There is serious diversity in the findings” (2018:

604)

While it is thus possible to point to a set of high-quality studies to support the assertion

3

that the functioning of democracies is, among other factors, also depending on adequate

economic fundamentals, there is far less consensus as to what the relevant economic

dimensions might be exactly. The scientific literature varies in the ways economic

performance is conceptualised. Most research about the repercussions of

macroeconomic performance for institutional trust conceive macroeconomic

performance as the wealth of an economy, the distribution of household incomes, and

the performance of the labour market measured as the GDP per capita, the Gini of

(mostly) disposable household incomes, and the unemployment rate. While wealth

levels or changes in economic prosperity are often examined, the distribution of

incomes has been at the centre of attention in social science research since rising levels

of inequality have been associated with all sorts of social and political consequences

(see Pickett & Wilkinson, 2009; van de Werfhorst & Salverda, 2012). With levels of

populism, support for radical parties, and political alienation rising in parallel to income

inequality (Norris and Inglehart, 2019), the question arises whether economic inequality

is at the roots of political turmoil in Western democracies. Against this backdrop, we

seek to analyse how changes in country-level economic inequality trigger individual level political responses in the form of loss of trust in the political system.

We seek to contribute a comprehensive empirical analysis on the democratic

implications of economic inequality where we probe for a wide spectrum of candidate

indicators and then aim to more concretely identify those dimensions of inequality that

are of demonstrable relevance for political fundamentals. In this analysis, we

specifically focus on citizens’ stated trust in the national parliament over the past two

decades in Europe. Trust in democratic institutions evidently is one of those

fundamental orientations that tap into what Easton (1975) saw as citizens’ “reservoir of

goodwill” and their “diffuse support” of democracy that derives from agreement over

4

democratic principles rather than from evaluations of specific issues and policy

proposals. The 23 older and newer European democracies included in our analysis of

European Social Survey data (ESS) provide a rich and informative testing ground to

evaluate hypotheses on the relationship between economic inequality and popular

support of democratic order. The first two decades of the 21st century have brought both

macroeconomic progress and increasing convergence between Western and Central and

Eastern Europe, as well as the painful strain associated with the Financial Crisis of

2008/09 and the subsequent Eurozone crisis, and thus represent a unique historical

observation window that offers a set of wide-ranging economic experiences to learn

from.

For the past two decades, the nationally representative and cross-nationally

comparable ESS has regularly fielded questions on respondents’ trust in the institutions

of democratic governance and has thus produced a rich series of time-series cross sectional survey data from its repeated cross-sectional samples. In fact, the time-series

component in the data is of particular analytical interest because this allows for the

application of panel data estimators that exploit the longitudinal variation in the data

when forming an estimate of the association between independent and dependent

variables, and that therefore hold the promise of being able to more credibly

approximate the causal effect of macroeconomic performance on citizens’ trust in

democratic institutions by affording a straightforward, yet versatile statistical tool to

safeguard respective inferences against an important class of potential confounders,

namely any and all time-invariant causes of political trust in a particular country,

however idiosyncratic or hard-to-define they might be, and completely irrespective of

whether such persistent causes of citizens’ democratic trust are thought to be rooted in

5

national political or economic cultures, a particular national history or some particular

type of national welfare regime.

In the following, we use hybrid multilevel regression models to identify the

plausibly causal effects of (changes in) macroeconomic inequality on (changes in)

citizens’ levels of trust in one of the key institutions of democratic governance - the

national parliament. Given that multilevel regression modelling enables us to condition

estimates on respondents’ own socio-economic status (SES) as well as on other socio demographic characteristics, we specifically identify the sociotropic effects of

macroeconomic inequality, i.e. that part of the association between inequality and

democratic trust that does not operate via citizens’ personal socio-economic standing

and any egocentric political motivation that may follow from it. From this starting point,

we make it our task to not just examine the evidence for some relationship between

inequality and citizens’ trust in institutions, but to more precisely identify which of the

many dimensions of macroeconomic inequality are the ones to also assume importance

for democratic fundamentals. To that end, we test for the political effects of a wide

range of indicators intended to tap into, the tails of the income distribution such as

poverty levels and the concentration of top incomes, as well as the level of public

redistribution besides the more commonly used indicator like the Gini coefficient.

While plausible political narratives might be construed for the relevance of these

various indicators and while, empirically, almost all indicators show the expected

bivariate correlation with levels of democratic trust, we find that the conventional

indicator of macroeconomic inequality– the inequality of market incomes – has been the

only indicator still significant after controlling for GDP per capita and national

unemployment rates and hence an important driver of citizens’ fundamental trust in the

institutions of democratic governance over the past two decades in Europe. This finding

6

does not deny a political role for other features of the macroeconomic environment, but

rather indicates that while more specific questions of distribution, solidarity, and

burden-sharing surely do inform citizens’ political preferences, they have not threatened

the fundamental legitimacy of democratic order in recent years. We will briefly outline

the theoretical background to our study to clarify our theoretical expectations and will

then provide readers with an explanation of our data as well as our statistical modelling

and identification strategy, before presenting and discussing our empirical evidence in

detail.

Theoretical framework

The proposition that economic adversity can threaten democratic stability is a classical

argument in political sociology (e.g., Lipset, 1960). It is reflected in standard

explanations of the fall of the Weimar Republic as well as current accounts linking the

economically “left behind” to the rise of the populist and far right (e.g., P. Norris &

Inglehart, 2019). Contemporary studies address the question of whether adverse

macroeconomic conditions pose a threat to democracy from within the conceptual

framework of political support (Easton, 1975). From this perspective, political trust, or

the "generalised confidence in democratic institutions" (Kumlin & Haugsgjerd, 2017) is

a central indicator for public support for democracy and a proxy for (subjective)

democratic legitimacy (Van Ham et al., 2017, Fuchs and Roller, 2019).

Although our goal is not to test the causal mechanisms linking macroeconomic

income inequality to political trust, we will briefly describe the four principal theoretical

explanations that we deem most important from our reading of the literature. In the

following, we will in turn discuss each of these approaches, which we label the social 7

psychological, the substantive outcome evaluation, the process-based evaluation and

the conflict perspective.

The social-psychological mechanism was prominently proposed in Wilkinson

and Pickett’s widely-known spirit-level thesis. While their thesis is rather broad, it

provides a general theoretical framework for why rising inequality begets a range of

“social dysfunctions”. The proposition is that inequality has negative consequences

because societies with higher income inequality are more stratified. Increased social

distances result in increased status anxiety and decreased social trust. This is also a

plausible explanation for how inequality affects trust in political institutions. On the

one hand, several scholars regard social trust as an important determinant of political

trust (Zmerli and Newton, 2008; Newton et al., 2018). On the other hand, recent

research argues that status anxiety is an important determinant of populist voting, which

is in turn strongly determined by political trust (Gidron and Hall, 2017; Engler and

Weisstanner, 2021; Stoetzer, Gisecke, and Klüver 2021). It follows that declining trust

in institutions may thus be seen as just one sub-dimension of social dysfunction that is

spurred by rising inequality due to its negative effects on individual psychological

dispositions and social cohesion.

The most common perspective in political science is that macroeconomic

inequality affects trust through a mechanism of substantive outcome evaluation.

According to the “trust-as-evaluation” approach, citizens observe or experience

concrete political processes or policy outputs, evaluate these based on their own

expectations and preferences, and extend or withhold trust on the basis of this

evaluation. Macroeconomic inequality would thus depress trust because citizens have

concrete political preferences regarding the desired level of inequality, and they hold the

political system accountable for delivering on this outcome. The well-known study by

8

Anderson and Singer (2008) provides support for this view, as it has shown that

inequality depresses trust and satisfaction with democracy primarily among left-wing

respondents. This fits with an understanding that citizens with egalitarian preferences

will expect inequality to be tackled politically, and will therefore also evaluate the

political system on the basis of their substantive policy preferences. Most studies on the

relationship between inequality and trust invoke this kind of argumentation when they

assume that citizens hold the political system accountable not only for the country’s

general economic performance, but also for the level of inequality (Anderson & Singer,

2008; Donovan & Karp, 2017; Martini & Quaranta, 2020).

A different perspective emphasises that inequality may affect trust not only via a

mechanism of substantive output evaluation, but also via a more process-based

evaluation that measures of external efficacy can capture (Bienstman, Hense, Gangl,

2023). The basic reasoning can be summarised as follows: When economic inequality

translates into unequal political resources and power, or when basic needs of large

segments of the population are not met, people may perceive that not all interests are

equally heeded and become cynical about their ability to influence the political process

(see Goubin, 2020). Because representative democracy draws legitimacy from the idea

that the political system is responsive to its citizens and that all have the ability to

participate in and influence the political process, negative assessments of

responsiveness and waning efficacy will ultimately erode confidence in its core political

institutions. Importantly and in contrast to the mechanism via substantive outcome

evaluation, this more process-based mechanism is independent of political preferences

and may therefore explain why inequality affects trust also among those who do not

regard inequality as a political problem (Kumlin et al, 2018).

9

Finally, the conflict perspective emphasises that income inequality may increase

distributional conflicts, leading to political polarisation that limits the state’s capacity to

solve social and political problems. This perception of reduced effectiveness in turn

would depress trust in democratic institutions. This perspective draws on Lipset’s

(1960) classical argument that both economic development and the distribution of

economic resources determine the level of conflict in societies, as well as their ability to

solve these conflicts politically. This view is supported by the finding that economic

inequality appears - alongside economic recessions - to be the most important structural

determinant of affective polarisation (Gidron et al., 2018).

Through and beyond affective polarisation, intense distributional conflict may

spill into and reflect in inter- and intra-party conflict. The scope of governmental action

may be constrained as political compromise and concessions to either opposition or

coalition parties become more challenging. As the capacity of governments to formulate

and execute policy solutions gets restricted, citizen’s general assessment of the state's

organisational capacity may suffer as well. In sum, to the extent that concrete economic

inequality limits a state’s effectiveness and leads to a changed perception of the state's

capacity to solve social and political conflict, this can result in a loss of confidence (cf.

Magalhães, 2014). Importantly, when increased political (distributional) conflict

induces the perception that democracy is not fit to solve problems and hence

dysfunctional, this does not presuppose that citizens have specific preferences about the

political outcome.

In conclusion, there are a number of reasons to suspect that inequality would

erode democratic support. And although we will not be able to test which of the above mentioned mechanisms is in operation, the different theoretical perspectives seem to

10

justify a closer empirical examination of the question whether macroeconomic

inequality and trust are related.

Which dimensions of macroeconomic inequality matter?

Different measures of inequality capture different aspects of the income distribution,

and these differences may have distinct political implications as well. In the following,

we propose to conceptually distinguish the various indicators into three more or less

distinct dimensions.We distinguish indicators that capture the general distribution of

incomes from those that measure the tails of the income distribution such as poverty and

top income shares from measures of redistribution or the welfare state.

Throughout the literature, most studies have used the Gini coefficient to assess

the effects of macroeconomic inequality on political trust. For the most, increasing

inequality on the national and regional level erodes political trust (Lipps & Schraff,

2021; Zhou & Jin, 2018) as well as external efficacy (M. Norris, 2015) and related

indicators of democratic support (Krieckhaus et al., 2014). Others have argued that it is

not the general level of inequality that matters but that changes in inequality affect trust

in the political system (Goubin & Hooghe, 2020; Hutalagung et al., 2019). A third

perspective specifies this relationship stating that the effects of increasing inequality on

institutional trust depend on the general level of inequality in a country (Zmerli &

Castillo, 2015) or the overall level of economic prosperity and institutional context. For

example, post-soviet and developing countries seem to be a specific context where

formerly very low levels of inequality accompanied by few chances of opportunity form

a specific environment in which more inequality might be ambiguous rather than purely

negative as it not only entails the unequal distribution of wealth but also the possibility

of advancement and development. In their study, Medeve-Balint and Boda (2014) find

11

that low inequality levels in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, and Slovenia go

along with low levels of institutional trust and a study differentiating developed from

developing and post-soviet countries find that for the latter, inequality of opportunity is

more decisive than classical income inequality (Ovchinnikov, 2021).

A few studies test more than the classical Gini coefficient, producing mostly

negative but partly also mixed effects of inequality on political trust. Goubin and

Hooghe find that the P90/P10 ratio, P90/50 ratio, P50/P10 ratio, and the risk of poverty

as well as the social exclusion rate all reduce institutional trust only when inequality is

increasing but not with respect to structural differences between countries (2020).

However, others report negative effects for the Theil index and the poverty rate

(Hutalagung et al., 2019). Testing the impact of national unemployment, corruption,

GDP per capita, inflation, and income inequality in Asia, Lee, Chang, & Hur (2020)

find that while national unemployment has a negative impact on trust, neither GDP and

inflation nor income inequality directly affect political trust, but that individual

perceptions of the macroeconomic performance are the relevant factors that matter.1 The

authors further highlight the importance of the regime type, stating that economic

performance was more important in authoritarian regimes (Lee et al., 2020). While

these are primarily economic and labour market indicators, Mingo and Faggiano (2020)

add to the economic perspective indicators aimed at security such as the homicide rate

and corruption and social spending for students as a part of the welfare state. The results

differ strongly across the different indicators, finding negative effects for economic

1 The argument that individual perceptions are more important than objective macroeconomic

indicators is prominent in the literature (see for example Goubin et al., 2020; Loveless,

2013). Yet, as discussed above, we will follow a different approach for the current analysis

and theoretical framework of this paper.

12

inequality but also for GDP growth, while reporting a positive effect on political trust of

social spending, and surprisingly also for criminality and national unemployment

(Mingo & Faggiano, 2020).

Taken together, most studies use GDP per capita, the Gini of disposable

household incomes (sometimes also market incomes) and more rarely include the

unemployment rate as an indicator for labour market performance. Furthermore, while

there are a few studies taking poverty into account, indicators capturing the

redistribution of wealth are not tested to our knowledge, so far. The Gini coefficient as a

general measure of the (un-) equal distribution of household incomes, that is most

sensitive to changes in the middle of the income distribution and thus is an important

measure for macroeconomic inequality. Yet, there are other relevant dimensions of

inequality, which we argue should be taken into consideration. When speaking about

the effects of a country’s economic inequality on an individual’s trust in political

institutions, it can be useful to differentiate the disparate dimensions of the income

distribution and make the conceptualisation of inequality explicit.

From this perspective, we develop and test three concrete dimensions of

macroeconomic inequality, which we suppose shape individual level institutional trust.

The first consists of the distribution of incomes to assess how equal economic resources

are spread across society, here the Gini of disposable or market incomes are important

measures, but also the Palma ratio, which is more sensitive to changes at the top of the

income distribution, we further differentiate between indicators that have the working

age as well as the total population as basis. The second dimension entails other

distributional indices such as the share of top and lowest incomes, which capture the

tails of the income distribution and might have a distinct impact on institutional trust. A

third dimension is that of economic redistribution accomplished by the welfare state,

13

which can be measured by the difference of market and disposable household incomes.

A country’s ability to redistribute wealth and therefore attenuate sharp economic

inequality might lead its citizens to positively evaluate political institutions

independently of actual rises in market income inequality.

Identification, data and statistical modelling

In the following, we combine the representative survey data of the European Social

Survey (ESS) and macroeconomic data obtained from Eurostat, OECD, and the World

Income Database to evaluate the relationships between changing macroeconomic

inequality and changes in citizens’ level of trust in the institutions of democratic

governance in 23 European countries over the past two decades. As the ESS has

regularly fielded questions on citizens’ trust in democratic institutions, this provides us

with repeated cross-sectional, representative and cross-nationally comparable survey

data that are ideally suited for the task at hand.

More specifically, the resulting hierarchical (multilevel) time-series cross sectional data enable us to use a particular class of hybrid multilevel regression models

that incorporate the principles of fixed-effects (FE) panel data modelling (see e.g.

Gangl, 2010; Morgan & Winship, 2015; Woolridge, 2010) at the contextual (i.e.

country) level, and that thereby help safeguard our subsequent inferences on the

implications of macroeconomic conditions for democratic trust against important threats

that are commonly encountered with alternative estimators. In particular, employing

country fixed effects in the regression specification is a simple, but analytically

powerful way of conditioning the estimates of primary interest, i.e. the estimates for the

effects of macroeconomic inequality, on any and all time-invariant predictors of the

level of political trust in a particular country. The country FE specification thus serves

14

to control for each and every possible country-level confounder, however idiosyncratic,

whether observed or unobserved, whether economic, cultural, social or political, and

including any patterns of mutually reinforcing and interlocking dynamics between the

different elements of national society, as long as these create a persistent influence on

citizens’ level of political trust during the study’s observation window.

When set within the hierarchical structure of a multilevel regression

specification, where survey respondents are being nested in survey waves and countries,

we are not just able to control for important confounders at the country level, however,

but also to condition the analysis on respondents’ own socio-economic status (SES) as

well as other respondent-level predictors of trust. We therefore specifically identify the

sociotropic (or contextual) effects of macroeconomic inequality on citizens’ democratic

trust in the present analysis, i.e. we focus on the relationship between the

macroeconomic environment and democratic fundamentals that operates independently

of citizens’ own socio-economic standing and any political implications that may flow

from correspondingly egocentric motivations. It is a direct statistical implication of the

country FE model that we estimate this relationship only from the time-series (within country) component of the data, and are thus expressing how levels of trust respond to

changes in the macroeconomic environment, whereas all between-country variation is

considered to reflect potential confounders. Compared with other, more conventional

forms of hybrid multilevel models that e.g. distinguish between the between-country

and the within-country component of observed covariates (cf. Allison, 2009), our

country FE specification offers the advantage of controlling for all sources of persistent

cross-country differences in democratic trust rather than just for cross-country

differences in observables, and is thus to be considered the decidedly more robust

15

approach to provide a plausibly valid approximation of the political effects of

macroeconomic inequality.

The basis of our empirical analysis is the European Social Survey Cumulative

File, ESS 1-8 (2018), a biennial survey that provides information on respondents’

political trust and socio-demographic background for 23 European countries covering

the period from 2002 till 2018. The selection of countries over the covered time span

includes variation in both macroeconomic performance as well as policy arrangements,

which might affect respondents’ political trust. To test for the effects of country level

variables on individual institutional trust, we augment the ESS with macroeconomic

indicators. Equipped with this multilevel time-series cross-sectional database, we are

able to make the country fixed-effects hierarchical probability model of

𝑃𝑟(𝑌𝑖𝑡𝑘= 1) = 𝛽0 + 𝜹𝑴𝑬𝑷𝒕𝒌+ 𝜷𝟏𝒕𝒌𝑺𝑬𝑺𝒊𝒕𝒌+ 𝜷𝟐𝒕𝒌𝑿𝒊𝒕𝒌+ 𝒖𝒌+ 𝑣𝑡𝑘+ 𝜀𝑖𝑡𝑘

with 𝜷𝟏𝒕𝒌= 𝜷𝟏+ 𝒗𝟏𝒕𝒌

𝜷𝟐𝒕𝒌= 𝜷𝟐+ 𝒗𝟐𝒕𝒌 (1)

the basis of our subsequent analysis. With this regression, we intend to predict the level

of trust in the national democratic institutions as expressed by respondents i at the

survey interview t in country k. To keep matters simple, we use a dichotomous outcome

variable that records whether citizens are stating to have at least some (or principal)

trust in the institutions of democratic governance. In the ESS, the original question asks:

Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each

of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10

means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...[country]'s parliament? In our analysis, we

collapse the 11-point Likert scale from the ESS to a binary variable that distinguishes

between respondents stating to have at least some trust (Y=1) and those respondents

16

who are expressing to have hardly any or no trust in parliament (Y=0) by taking a value

of 4 as the relevant threshold on the ESS Likert scale. We are hence predicting the

probability of obtaining a positive response on the right-hand side of the regression

equation in practice. As a multilevel specification, the left-hand side of the regression

equation features respondent-level as well as contextual-level predictors of citizens’

trust. At the individual level, it is of obvious importance to control for the effects of

citizens’ own socioeconomic position in order to identify the sociotropic (contextual)

effects of macroeconomic inequality proper, but we of course also make use of the

opportunity to account for the potential role of other socio-demographic predictors of

trust. We do not wish to advocate any particular scalar measure of respondents’ SES,

but instead treat it as a vector of citizens’ socio-economic attributes. To that end, we

include variables measuring respondents’ age collapsed into five categories (16-24

years, 25-34 years, 35-44 years, 45-54 years and 55 years and older), gender, the level

of education in three distinct categories (less than secondary, secondary education, and

tertiary education), and the respondent’s social class using the EGP class scheme

compressed into seven categories (distinguishing high controllers from low controllers,

from routine non manual workers, self employed individuals, skilled manual workers,

semi-unskilled manual workers, and farm workers). Finally, to control for the

respondent’s financial resources, we use the household’s monthly net equivalence

income constructing a variable that places respondents into four percentiles by survey

wave and country. Summary statistics for the individual-level variables are shown in

Table A1 in the appendix. In view of our primary analytical interests, we augment this

purely micro-level specification by a set of macroeconomic indicators that capture

different aspects of national economic inequality at time point t in country k. The 18

macroeconomic inequality indicators correspond each to one of the three dimensions of

17

economic inequality described above and are displayed in the table following this

section. We are of course primarily interested in the estimates of the effects of

inequality on democratic trust, and to ensure the appropriate causal order, we lag all

macroeconomic indicators by one year in the analyses (i.e. we are using t-1 in the actual

analyses, but prefer to keep formal notation as simple as possible for the sake of the

present exposition). In addition to the observed macroeconomic covariates, the model

assumes its multilevel character by incorporating a country-level fixed effect (i.e. set of

country dummies) and a country-survey wave random effect in addition to the standard

respondent-level error term, and we also allow the effects of all respondent-level

covariates (i.e. the coefficient vectors) to randomly vary across survey waves and

countries. All error terms are assumed to follow standard normal distributions, and

multilevel estimation ensures that standard error computations reflect the clustered

nature of observations. As we do not have any interest in performing a detailed variance

decomposition at the higher levels of the model, we furthermore fit equation (1) as a

two-level model with country-survey waves tk as the model’s contextual level to

facilitate computation; given the presence of the country fixed effects in the equation,

however, our model of course involves an implicit third level, and this also affects (i.e.

is correct to inflate) the standard error estimates for the effects of the time-varying

macroeconomic covariates of primary interest in the present context.

Finally, due to its easier interpretation in terms of average marginal effects

(AME) on the probability scale as well as the fact that its coefficient estimates may

directly be compared across model specifications, we estimate equation (1) as a linear

probability model, i.e. we employ a linear regression model despite its obvious

statistical drawbacks in terms of out-of-range predictions and heteroskedasticity in the

18

bottom-level error terms (which, strictly speaking, are not of any substantive interest in

the present application, however).

To identify the politically relevant dimensions of inequality, we proceed with a

sequential setup in our analyses. In a first series of models, we aim at exploring the

‘bivariate’ relationships between trust and the covariates by including each in isolation

with survey-year dummies as the only controls. The second series of models provides a

baseline estimate of the sociotropic within-effects of the inequality indicators by

including country fixed effects and the individual-level covariates. In the two final

series of stepwise models, we include GDP per capita and the unemployment rate as

controls for macroeconomic performance and the state of the labour market.

We control for GDP as a general measure of economic prosperity because it is,

at the country level, correlated with economic inequality and therefore frequently

regarded as the primary alternative explanation for the association between inequality

and social outcomes (Delhey & Steckermeier, 2020, Layte, 2012, Wilkinson & Pickett,

2010, p. 285). A test for the effects of income inequality on political trust without

controlling for economic prosperity would thus be a rather weak test of the hypothesised

relationship. The unemployment rate, on the other hand, is a key indicator for economic

performance, reflecting the state of the labour market and economic shocks. Measures

of income inequality, in particular those that relate to, or capture specific aspects of the

income distribution, such as the poverty rate or quintile share ratios, are sensitive to

economic crises, recessions or labour market slumps. Without accounting for the

unemployment rate and thus for the share of the population without labour market

incomes, the effects of economic inequality may partly reflect such broader economic

developments. The models controlling for the unemployment rate and thus for the

bottom share of the population without labour market incomes certainly remove a

19

substantively meaningful portion of the potential effect of a macro-phenomenon such as

country-level economic inequality on social outcomes. However, these models are

substantively meaningful on their own terms, as the estimand becomes the effect of

more secular changes in inequality, i.e. above and beyond those related to a labour

market crisis.

INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

Empirical results

While the literature review pointed to the Gini coefficient of disposable incomes as the

most frequently used indicator of macroeconomic inequality, our exploratory analyses

reveal that most of the inequality indicators correlate, albeit with different strengths (see

Table A2 in the Appendix). The strongest correlations are found mainly between

indicators that can be considered measuring a similar dimension of inequality. It does

not come as a surprise that the Gini coefficient of disposable household incomes has the

strongest correlation with different measures of income inequality (e.g., the Palma ratio

and the S80/20 quintile share ratio) and that it correlates stronger with the poverty rates

than with the wealth shares. Moreover, wealth shares and poverty indicators correlate

less strongly and the measures of redistribution even less so. This underlines our

theoretical assumption of different dimensions of economic inequality. These

intercorrelations imply that there are important aspects of economic inequality which

are not captured by the more standard selection of indicators in the literature.

INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE

In order to get a first impression of the bivariate relationships between political trust and

some of the indicators of economic inequality, the Gini coefficient, the Palma ratio of

disposable incomes, the poverty rate of the working age population and income shares

20

at the top 10 level, Figure 1 shows a scatterplot of the country-year averages of trust on

the Y-axis and the macroeconomic indicator on the X-axis. All four plots show negative

associations between trust and the indicators of economic inequality. Also, even though

they do not vary greatly, the strongest decline in trust is visible when the Gini of market

incomes rises followed by the poverty measure. The other two indicators show a

somewhat weaker relationship. In general, these patterns are thus in line with the basic

proposition that institutional trust declines when economic inequality rises. In order to

more systematically assess the associations between our indicators and political trust,

we now turn to the series of multivariate models that are summarised in Table 2.

INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

In a first analytical step (M1), we fit a separate model for each inequality indicator

while controlling for period fixed effects and the individual-level covariates described

in our methodological section. This first series of models omits country fixed effects

and thus serves solely to inspect the difference between cross-sectional and over-time

variation, net of any secular trends in political trust in the sample. In this baseline

model, where the parameter estimates are a mixture of within and between effects, all

macroeconomic inequality indicators are significant. Apart from the wealth shares,

which have a small but positive impact, all other measures of inequality negatively

influence political trust. This means that in this basic model, rising inequality measured

globally or more specifically with respect to top incomes and poverty levels negatively

affects citizens’ trust in the political system. The negative effect of economic

redistribution and household pooling, which are our measures tapping into the

performance of welfare states and families, and their respective capacity to mitigate

financial hardship, might seem counterintuitive at first. Yet, as will become apparent in

models M4 and M5, these measures primarily capture the demand for social assistance

21

and social spending in the bivariate analysis, and therefore indicate that political trust is

lower in countries and years where a higher share of households is in need of public

support.

However, when country fixed effects are included in order to obtain an estimate

of the within-association (M2 in Table 2), only three of the 18 indicators remain

statistically significant. In Model 2, the Gini coefficient of market incomes is the

strongest remaining indicator that is significantly and negatively related to trust. The

disposable income poverty rate as well as the degree of economic redistribution remain

significant but have a smaller impact on citizens’ political trust. This points to

considerable unobserved heterogeneity at the country level that result in large

discrepancies regarding the between- and within-effects. Model 3 ads individual level

controls and thus specifies a proper sociotropic effect. It shows that when the individual

socio-economic position is accounted for, the effect of the Gini of market incomes

hardly changes. Substantially, this indicates that the observed relationship between

market income inequality and political trust does not result from compositional

differences in individual economic situations. Models 2 and 3 thus show that, even

without further macroeconomic controls, specifying a proper model for the

identification of a sociotropic effect from within-variation only changes the substantive

conclusions about the relevance of different dimensions of macroeconomic inequality.

Model 4 in Table 2 summarises the results of our next modelling phase. Here,

we add GDP per capita as a baseline control in order to assess the associations net of

economic performance in the more narrow sense, for which GDP growth may be

considered the prime indicator. In itself, the year-to-year change in economic growth

captured by changes in GDP per capita has a positive effect on trust across the 18 fitted

models. The resulting changes in estimates can be briefly summarised: The coefficient

22

of the Gini of market incomes is slightly reduced, but the effect remains otherwise

unchanged. All other indicators of economic inequality remain statistically insignificant

or lose their statistical significance. Hence, once we control for the performance of the

economy, solely the Gini coefficient remains an important predictor of political trust.

Neither poverty nor top incomes are relevant in determining political trust, once the

overall performance of the economy is accounted for. Furthermore, it is specifically the

Gini coefficient of market incomes that is relevant, not the Gini coefficient of household

disposable incomes that has conventionally been used in most previous research.

Expressed in substantive terms, this finding implies that changes in the distribution of

labour market earnings are driving dissatisfaction with democracy, and that increasing

public redistribution tends not to create any positive democratic payoffs directly.

As a final step, we fit a series of models including the unemployment rate as an

additional macro-level control and the primary indicator for economic shocks. This

inclusion turned the effect of GDP per capita insignificant. This means that once we

control for labour market performance, economic growth no longer predicts trust levels

in the national parliament. While this is an interesting finding in and of itself, more

interestingly, three of our measures of relative poverty are now also statistically

significant. This points to poverty having an impact on political trust once

unemployment is taken into account and when individuals might attribute the blame of

poverty not to the labour market but to a dysfunctional political system. As an addition,

we probed this interpretation by additionally controlling for market income inequality

(Model 6). In these models, the poverty effects turn insignificant. Rather than poverty

being impactful of itself, the observed effects seem to be driven by the association

between poverty and unequal pre-redistribution incomes. While in Model 4 and more so

Model 5, the coefficient estimate of the Gini coefficient of market incomes is further

23

reduced (as compared to M1. M2 and M3), it is the only indicator that remains

statistically significant through all model specifications and consistently reduces

individual’s trust in the political system. Or put in other words, rising inequality of

labour market incomes thus systematically contributes to reduced trust in the national

parliament even after controlling for national economic performance and the state of the

labour market.

Discussion and conclusion

As many developed economies have seen increasing levels of macroeconomic

inequality in recent decades, the potential implications of these developments for

various social outcomes have come under increased social scientific scrutiny. In this

study, we have addressed the question of which dimension of macroeconomic

inequality matters for democratic orientations. We have done so by focusing on trust in

parliament as the core institution of representative democracy and a prime indicator for

citizen support for democratic governance.

Our findings suggest that out of the various dimensions of macroeconomic

inequality, the Gini coefficient of market incomes holds significant relevance even after

controlling for a country's general economic prosperity and labour market performance.

Indicators at the upper tails of the income distribution, such as top income shares and

wealth shares, were not significant once GDP and unemployment rates were controlled

for. This is also true for measures of public redistribution. While poverty rates initially

appeared impactful for trust, further investigation suggests this is likely attributed to its

association with market income inequality. Net of market income inequality, poverty

rates are unrelated to trust. In sum, among the various measures of inequality we have

tested, only market income inequality is consistently related to trust in parliament.

24

This emphasises the importance of changes in the middle of the income

distribution, as the Gini is a relatively broad measure of inequality that is at the same

time more sensitive to changes in the middle. The finding that market income inequality

alongside the unemployment rate are the primary economic determinants of trust

emphasizes the political relevance of changes in the labour market. Rather than post distribution income inequality, which links to inequality in consumption capacity, our

findings highlight the importance of pre-distribution incomes and the negative impact of

the increasingly differential valuation of labour. From this viewpoint, the widening

disparities in labour income and income opportunities that are driven by factors such as

skill-biased technological change and labour market polarization may signal a

divergence in social recognition that is not remedied by redistribution. In the short term,

the avoidance of labour market crises and the dispersion of pre-redistribution incomes is

paramount for fostering trust in basic democratic institutions, whereas short-term

alterations in the welfare state or the degree of redistribution seem to have limited

immediate effects.

It is crucial to point out that our research reflects the average impact of

economic inequality on political trust over the past two decades. Our conclusions thus

pertain to the overall effect of changes in inequality on shifts in political trust, observed

across countries and individuals. Other forms or indicators of macroeconomic inequality

might be consequential at distinct times or among specific subpopulations. As a case in

point, poverty rates or the effectiveness of welfare state redistribution might have more

pronounced implications for those with low socioeconomic status.

There are, however, certain limitations to our study that point to future research

directions. The effects of changes over time could potentially be better exploited with

longer time-series, as changes in economic inequality have been more pronounced in

25

the 1980s and 1990s. Additionally, our focus on Western EU countries means that our

findings may be more applicable to specific regions with more or less similar

expectations towards the state performing at least some kind of economic redistribution.

Future research could thus consider other groups of countries and political systems

where inequality might relate to political trust in different ways. In countries with

higher levels of inequality and more extreme poverty the effect of redistribution on

democratic trust might be larger. Moreover, future studies may analyse the effect of

economic inequality for a specific sub-sample such as Eastern European countries,

which have undergone political and economic transformations, and where an increase in

inequality may induce more and not less trust.

Finally, our findings suggest that while the Gini coefficient of market incomes is

an important determinant of trust in democratic institutions, national unemployment

rates may be even more critical. Furthermore, even though the development of

inequality in the past decades was marked by stark income and wealth gains at the top,

and despite skyrocketing fortunes and executive pay feature prominently in public

debates, it is the developments in the middle and lower ends of the income distribution

that are most relevant for citizens’ trust in the political system.

26

References

Allison, P. D. (2009). Fixed effects regression models. SAGE Publications.

Anderson, C. (2007). The End of Economic Voting? Contingency Dilemmas and the

Limits of Democratic Accountability. Annual Review of Political Science, 10.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.10.050806.155344

Anderson, C. J., & Singer, M. M. (2008). The sensitive left and the impervious right.

Multilevel models and the politics of inequality, ideology, and legitimacy in

europe. Comparative Political Studies, 41(4), 564–599.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414007313113

Bartels, L. M. (2008). Unequal democracy. Princeton University Press.

Bienstman, S., Hense, S., Gangl, M. (2023). Explaining the "democratic malaise":

Inequality, external efficacy, and political trust. European Journal of Political

Research. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12611

Campbell, A., Gurin, G., & Miller, W. E. (1954). The voter decides. Row, Peterson, and

Co.

Christmann, P. (2018). Economic performance, quality of democracy and satisfaction

with democracy. Electoral Studies, 53, 79–89.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2018.04.004

Craig, S. C., Niemi, R. G., & Silver, G. E. (1990). Political efficacy and trust: A report

on the NES pilot study items. Political Behavior, 12(3), 289–314.

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992337

Dahl, R. A. (1971). Polyarchy: Participation and opposition. Yale Univ. Press.

Donovan, T., & Karp, J. (2017). Electoral rules, corruption, inequality and evaluations

of democracy. European Journal of Political Research, 56(3), 469.

https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12188

Easton, D. (1975). A re-assessment of the concept of political support. British Journal of

Political Science, 5(4), 435–457. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123400008309

Elsässer, L., Hense, S., & Schäfer, A. (2021). Not just money: Unequal responsiveness

in egalitarian democracies. Journal of European Public Policy, 28(12), 1890–

1908. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2020.1801804

Esaiasson, P., Kölln, A.-K., & Turper, S. (2015). External Efficacy and Perceived

Responsiveness—Similar but Distinct Concepts. International Journal of Public

Opinion Research, 27(3), 432–445. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/edv003

27

European Social Survey. (2018). Cumulative File, ESS 1-8: Data file edition 1.0 NSD Norwegian Centre for Research Data, Norway—Data Archive and distributer of

ESS data for ESS ERIC.

Fuchs, D., & Roller, E. (2019). Globalization and political legitimacy in western europe.

In U. Van Beek (Ed.), Democracy under threat: A crisis of legitimacy? (pp. 221–

254). Springer International Publishing.

Gangl, M. (2010). Causal Inference in Sociological Research. Annual Review of

Sociology, 36(1), 21–47. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.012809.102702

Gidron, N., Adams, J., & Horne, W. (2018). How ideology, economics and institutions

shape affective polarization in democratic polities. Annual Conference of the

American Political Science Association.

Gilens, M. (2012). Affluence and influence. Princeton University Press.

Goubin, S. (2018). Economic inequality, perceived responsiveness and political trust.

Acta Politica, 55(1). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41269-018-0115-z

Goubin, S., & Hooghe, M. (2020). The Effect of Inequality on the Relation Between

Socioeconomic Stratification and Political Trust in Europe. Social Justice

Research, 33(2), 219–247. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-020-00350-z

Goubin, S., Hooghe, M., Okolikj, M., & Stiers, D. (2020). Economic inequality and

electoral accountability: Inequality and differences in economic voting across

Western democracies. Comparative European Politics, 18(5), 793–818.

https://doi.org/10.1057/s41295-020-00209-2

Hutalagung, E. N., Akita, T., & Fami, M. (2019). Inequality and Political Trust in

Indonesia.

Inglehart, R., & Norris, P. (2017). Trump and the Populist Authoritarian Parties: The

Silent Revolution in Reverse. Perspectives on Politics, 15(2), 443–454.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592717000111

Krieckhaus, J., Son, B., Bellinger, N. M., & Wells, J. M. (2014). Economic Inequality

and Democratic Support. The Journal of Politics, 76(1), 139–151.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022381613001229

Kumlin, S. (2011). Dissatisfied democrats, policy feedback and European welfare

states, 1976-2001. In S. Zmerli & M. Hooghe (Eds.), Political trust: Why

context matters (pp. 163–186). ECPR Press.

28

Kumlin, S., & Haugsgjerd, A. (2017). The welfare state and political trust: Bringing

performance back in. In S. Zmerli & T. W. G. Van Der Meer (Eds.), Handbook

on political trust (pp. 285–301). Edward Elgar Publishing.

Kumlin, S., Stadelmann-Steffen, I., & Haugsgjerd, A. (2018). Trust and the welfare

state. In E. M. Uslaner (Ed.), The oxford handbook of social and political trust

(pp. 385–408). Oxford University Press.

Lee, D., Chang, C. Y., & Hur, H. (2020). Economic performance, income inequality

and political trust: New evidence from a cross-national study of 14 Asian

countries. Asia Pacific Journal of Public Administration, 42(2), 66–88.

https://doi.org/10.1080/23276665.2020.1755873

Lewis-Beck, M. S., & Stegmaier, M. (2000). Economic Determinants of Electoral

Outcomes. Annual Review of Political Science, 3(1), 183–219.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.3.1.183

Lipps, J., & Schraff, D. (2021). Regional inequality and institutional trust in Europe.

European Journal of Political Research, 60(4), 892–913.

https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12430

Lipset, S. M. (1960). Political Man: The social bases of politics. Johns Hopkins Univ.

Press.

Lipset, S. M. (1994). The Social Requisites of Democracy Revisited: 1993 Presidential

Address. American Sociological Review, 59(1), 1–22.

https://doi.org/10.2307/2096130

Loveless, M. (2013). The Deterioration of Democratic Political Culture: Consequences

of the Perception of Inequality. Social Justice Research, 26(4), 471–491.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-013-0198-7

Magalhães, P. C. (2014). Government effectiveness and support for democracy.

European Journal of Political Research, 53(1), 77–97.

https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12024

Martini, S., & Quaranta, M. (2020). Citizens and democracy in europe: Contexts,

changes and political support. In Citizens and democracy in europe. Springer

International Publishing.

Medve-Bálint, G., & Boda, Z. (2014). The Poorer You Are, the More You Trust? The

Effect of Inequality and Income on Institutional Trust in East-Central Europe.

29

Czech Sociological Review, 50(3), 419–454.

https://doi.org/10.13060/00380288.2014.50.3.104

Mingo, I., & Faggiano, M. P. (2020). Trust in Institutions Between Objective and

Subjective Determinants: A Multilevel Analysis in European Countries. Social

Indicators Research, 151(3), 815–839. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-020 02400-0

Morgan, S. L., & Winship, C. (2015). Counterfactuals and causal inference methods and

principles for social research (Second Edition). Cambridge University Press.

Norris, M. (2015). The economic roots of external efficacy: Assessing the relationship

between external political efficacy and income inequality. Canadian Journal of

Political Science, 48(4), 791–813. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0008423915001080

Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2019). Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit, and authoritarian

populism. In Cultural backlash. Cambridge University Press.

Ovchinnikov, V. (2021). “Unfair” Inequality and Political Trust. SSRN Electronic

Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3933809

Pickett, K., & Wilkinson, R. (2010). The spirit level: Why equality is better for

everyone. Penguin UK.

Pitkin, H. F. (1967). The concept of representation. University of California Press.

https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520340503

Quaranta, M., & Martini, S. (2016). Does the economy really matter for satisfaction

with democracy? Longitudinal and cross-country evidence from the European

Union. Electoral Studies, 42, 164–174.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2016.02.015

Schattschneider, E. E. (1965). The semisovereign people: A realist’s view of democracy

in America. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Traber, D., Hänni, M., Giger, N., & Breunig, C. (2022). Social status, political priorities

and unequal representation. European Journal of Political Research, 61(2), 351–

373. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12456

van der Meer, T., & Hakhverdian, A. (2017). Political Trust as the Evaluation of

Process and Performance: A Cross-National Study of 42 European Countries.

Political Studies, 65(1), 81–102. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321715607514

Van Der Meer, T. W. G. (2018). Economic Performance and Political Trust. In The

Oxford Handbook of Social and Political Trust (pp. 599–616). Oxford

30

University Press. https://academic.oup.com/edited volume/34638/chapter/295121379

Van de Werfhorst, H. G., & Salverda, W. (2012). Consequences of economic

inequality: Introduction to a special issue. Research in Social Stratification and

Mobility, 30(4), 377–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2012.08.001

Van Erkel, P. F. a., & Van Der Meer, T. W. g. (2016). Macroeconomic performance,

political trust and the Great Recession: A multilevel analysis of the effects of

within-country fluctuations in macroeconomic performance on political trust in

15 EU countries, 1999–2011. European Journal of Political Research, 55(1),

177–197. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12115

Van Ham, C., Thomassen, J., Aarts, K., & Andeweg, R. (Eds.). (2017). Myth and

Reality of the legitimacy crisis: Explaining trends and cross-national differences

in established democracies. Oxford University Press.

Weisstanner, D., & Armingeon, K. (2021). Redistributive preferences: Why actual

income is ultimately more important than perceived income. Journal of

European Social Policy, 095892872110379.

https://doi.org/10.1177/09589287211037912

Woolridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data

(Second). The MIT Press.

Zhou, Y. J., & Jin, S. (2018). Inequality and Political Trust in China: The Social

Volcano Thesis Re-examined. The China Quarterly, 236, 1033–1062.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305741018001297

Zmerli, S., & Castillo, J. C. (2015). Income inequality, distributive fairness and political

trust in Latin America. Social Science Research, 52, 179–192.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2015.02.003

31

Appendix

INSERT TABLE A1 ABOUT HERE

INSERT TABLE A2 ABOUT HERE

INSERT TABLE A3 ABOUT HERE

32

Tables and figures

Table 1. Overview of macroeconomic inequality indicators

Indicators Number of obs. Mean Min Max (Un)equal distribution of incomes

Disposable incomes: Gini (total pop.) 125296 0.294 0.232 0.383 Market incomes: Gini (total pop.) 119306 0.476 0.367 0.58 Disposable incomes: Gini (working-age pop.) 125296 0.293 0.227 0.377 Market incomes: Gini (working-age pop.) 119306 0.419 0.32 0.544 Disposable incomes: Palma ratio (working-age pop.) 120010 1.080 0.75 1.65 Disposable incomes: Palma ratio (total pop.) 120010 1.086 0.77 1.7 Public redistribution

redist 119558 0.137 0 0.267 hhpool 114823 0.143 0.071 0.255 The tails of the distribution

Wealth share S95S100 (top 5%) 13031 36.959 21.754 55.498 Wealth share S99S100 (top 1%) 13031 17.845 7.723 31.834 Disposable incomes: income shares S80/S20 (total pop.) 120010 4.627 3.3 7.1 Disposable incomes: income shares S80/S20 (working-age pop.) 120010 4.751 3.3 7.2 Disposable incomes share S90S100 149393 0.287 0.228 0.418 Disposable incomes share S95S100 149393 0.195 0.137 0.320 Disposable incomes share S99S100 149393 0.084 0.043 0.178 Disposable incomes: Poverty rate, 60% median income (total pop.) 123622 14.654 8.6 22.2 Market incomes: Poverty rate, 60% median income (total pop.) 116401 20.916 12.3 34 Market incomes: Poverty rate, 60% median income (working-age pop.) 116401 18.799 11.7 28.8 Disposable incomes: Poverty rate, 60% median income (working-age pop.) 116401 13.794 7.6 22.8 Market incomes: Poverty rate, 40% median income (total pop.) 116401 6.527 2.8 14.7 Disposable incomes: Poverty rate, 40% median income (total pop.) 121908 4.481 1.9 11.2 Market incomes: Poverty rate, 40% median income (working-age pop.) 116401 6.683 3.2 14.6 Disposable incomes: Poverty rate, 40% median income (working-age pop.) 116401 4.828 2.1 11.9 Control: Labour market performance

Unemployment rate 25-54 149393 7.020 1.954 24.465 Control: Wealth

gdphd 138864 41304.9 16024.29 75845.05

33

Table 2. The income distribution and political trust, estimates from stepwise multilevel

regression models

M 1 M 2 M 3 M 4 M 5 M 6

bivariate country FE's Ind. SES GDP/per cap

unempl. rate Gini mkt inc.

Macro-level controls Period fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes GDP per capita pos. n.s. n.s. Unemployment rate neg. neg. Mkt Inc.: Gini (work.-age pop.) neg. Economic inequality Disp. Inc.: Gini (tot. pop.) -1.799*** 0.208 0.169 0.681 0.368 1.385* Mkt Inc.: Gini (tot. pop.) -1.902*** -3.130*** -3.124*** -3.016*** -1.978** -1.104 Disp. Inc.: Gini (work.-age pop.) -1.914*** -0.755 -0.782 0.107 0.146 1.463* Mkt Inc.: Gini (work.-age pop.) -1.889*** -2.757*** -2.739*** -2.628*** -1.715** 0 Disp. Inc.: Palma ratio (work.-age pop.) -0.326*** -0.103 -0.108 -0.009 0.008 0.207 Disp. Inc.: Palma ratio (tot. pop.) -0.303*** 0.050 0.043 0.079 0.029 0.194 Redistribution Public redistribution (disp./mkt inc. Gini) -0.942*** -0.985 -0.96 -0.377 0.064 0.087 HH pooling -2.370*** 0.243 0.202 0.377 0.063 -0.019 Tails of the inc. distribution Wealth share S95S100 (top 5%) 0.004*** -0.005 -0.005 -0.006 -0.007 -0.006* Wealth share S99S100 (top 1%) 0.003*** -0.003 -0.003 -0.002 -0.005 -0.009*** Disp. Inc.: inc. shares S80/S20 (tot. pop.) -0.077*** -0.017 -0.018 0.010 0.006 0.038 Disp. Inc.: inc. shares S80/S20 (work.-age pop.) -0.073*** -0.045 -0.045 -0.017 -0.006 0.032 Disp. Inc. share S90S100 -1.661*** 1.135 1.133 0.896 0.206 0.594 Disp. Inc. share S95S100 -1.711*** 0.985 0.99 0.698 0.059 0.504 Disp. Inc. share S99S100 -1.128*** 0.926 0.946 0.504 -0.061 0.488 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (tot. pop.) -0.021*** 0.006 0.005 0.005 -0.007 -0.003 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (tot. pop.) -0.016*** 0.005 0.005 0.005 -0.001 0.001 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (work.-age p.) -0.020*** -0.007 -0.007 -0.004 -0.005 -0.002 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (work.-age p.) -0.026*** -0.012 -0.012 -0.005 -0.009 -0.006 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (tot. pop.) -0.029*** -0.001 -0.001 0.001 -0.008 -0.004 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (tot. pop.) -0.038*** -0.021 -0.020 -0.014 -0.017** -0.010 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (work.-age p.) -0.029*** -0.010 -0.01 -0.007 -0.010* -0.006 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (work.-age p.) -0.032*** -0.026 -0.025 -0.017 -0.017* -0.012 Note: Parameter and standard error estimates from stepwise multilevel regression models. Each reported result corresponds to the coefficient estimate for the specific inequality indicator in a regression model that includes the inequality indicator, period fixed effects, and additional macro-level controls as stated. All models furthermore control for respondent gender, age, education, EGP class position, and household income. Statistical significance levels indicated at* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.

34

Table A1: Summary statistics for individual-level variables

Variable Number of obs. Mean Min Max Trust in country's parliament 149393 0.669 0 1 HH equivalence income - 4 percentiles by wave 149393 2.503 1 4 Gender 149393 1.512 1 2 Highest level of education 149393 2.191 1 3 Age of respondent 149393 3.270 1 5 EGP class scheme - compressed 149393 3.542 1 7 ESS round 149393 4.466 1 8

35

Table A2: Correlation matrix of inequality indicators

Unemployment rate (25-64) 1 GDP per capita -0.131 1 Disp. Inc.: Gini (tot. pop.) 0.282 -0.054 1 Mkt. Inc.: Gini (tot. pop.) 0.718 -0.034 0.610 1 Disp. Inc.: Gini (working - age) 0.226 0.027 0.983 0.555 1 Mkt. Inc.: Gini (working - age) 0.867 0.078 0.580 0.873 0.555 1 Disp. Inc.: Palma ratio (working-age) 0.289 0.018 0.982 0.605 0.992 0.597 1 Disp. Inc.: Palma ratio (tot. pop.) 0.324 -0.044 0.991 0.627 0.976 0.612 0.989 1 Public redistribution (disp./mkt. inc. Gini) 0.776 0.274 0.328 0.582 0.358 0.863 0.385 0.364 1 HH pooling 0.336 -0.335 0.436 0.199 0.341 0.291 0.324 0.401 0.121 1 Wealth share S95S100 (top 5%) -0.288 0.319 0.452 0.120 0.432 -0.060 0.414 0.415 -0.288 0.122 1 Wealth share S99S100 (top 1%) -0.444 0.122 0.201 -0.193 0.185 -0.366 0.158 0.160 -0.534 0.092 0.903 1 Disp. Inc.: inc. shares S80/S20 (tot. pop.) 0.250 -0.048 0.974 0.533 0.966 0.535 0.960 0.966 0.304 0.464 0.411 0.184 1 Disp. Inc.: inc. shares S80/S20 (work.-age pop.) 0.155 0.083 0.914 0.410 0.946 0.462 0.928 0.905 0.310 0.357 0.382 0.167 0.968 Disp. Inc. share S90S100 -0.170 -0.330 0.477 0.356 0.460 -0.014 0.446 0.436 -0.298 0.143 0.220 0.127 0.459 Disp. Inc. share S95S100 -0.206 -0.316 0.479 0.329 0.480 -0.022 0.459 0.435 -0.292 0.104 0.213 0.128 0.470 Disp. Inc. share S99S100 -0.239 -0.238 0.450 0.297 0.477 -0.044 0.453 0.407 -0.288 -0.011 0.237 0.161 0.443 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.271 -0.382 0.625 0.542 0.556 0.326 0.546 0.571 0.028 0.626 0.231 0.128 0.631 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.493 -0.322 0.780 0.781 0.717 0.625 0.725 0.753 0.311 0.567 0.161 -0.052 0.753 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (work.-age p.) 0.384 -0.312 0.789 0.718 0.765 0.544 0.760 0.754 0.252 0.443 0.222 0.049 0.758 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (work.-age p.) 0.178 -0.334 0.652 0.510 0.637 0.281 0.618 0.600 0.007 0.424 0.278 0.197 0.650 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.055 -0.286 0.617 0.335 0.591 0.145 0.555 0.550 -0.086 0.571 0.313 0.264 0.654 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (tot. pop.) -0.079 -0.350 0.511 0.122 0.502 -0.011 0.446 0.433 -0.185 0.538 0.222 0.240 0.586 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (work.-age p.) -0.069 -0.201 0.555 0.243 0.570 0.035 0.530 0.494 -0.157 0.350 0.311 0.291 0.598 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (work.-age p.) -0.196 -0.235 0.429 0.011 0.477 -0.110 0.417 0.362 -0.221 0.262 0.186 0.235 0.517

36

Table A2 (continued)

Unemployment rate (25-64)

GDP per capita

Disp. Inc.: Gini (tot. pop.)

Mkt. Inc.: Gini (tot. pop.)

Disp. Inc.: Gini (working - age)

Mkt. Inc.: Gini (working - age)

Disp. Inc.: Palma ratio (working-age)

Disp. Inc.: Palma ratio (tot. pop.)

Public redistribution (disp./mkt. inc. Gini)

HH pooling

Wealth share S95S100 (top 5%)

Wealth share S99S100 (top 1%)

Disp. Inc.: inc. shares S80/S20 (tot. pop.)

Disp. Inc.: inc. shares S80/S20 (work.-age pop.) 1

Disp. Inc. share S90S100 0.417 1

Disp. Inc. share S95S100 0.450 0.991 1

Disp. Inc. share S99S100 0.452 0.959 0.983 1

Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.534 0.754 0.728 0.662 1 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.640 0.684 0.660 0.592 0.921 1 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (work.-age p.) 0.684 0.751 0.751 0.725 0.892 0.955 1 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 60% med. inc. (work.-age p.) 0.605 0.823 0.828 0.817 0.929 0.866 0.945 1 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.623 0.770 0.770 0.736 0.937 0.804 0.849 0.945 1 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (tot. pop.) 0.589 0.689 0.711 0.686 0.828 0.654 0.715 0.844 0.945 1 Mkt Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (work.-age p.) 0.619 0.799 0.818 0.826 0.829 0.690 0.802 0.935 0.953 0.904 1 Disp. Inc.: pov. rate, 40% med. inc. (work.-age p.) 0.594 0.680 0.731 0.762 0.660 0.495 0.641 0.799 0.854 0.927 0.925 1

Figure 1. Bivariate association between political trust and indicators of economic

inequality